{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2821
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-ItalicMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red95\green73\blue122;\red50\green120\blue198;\red0\green176\blue80;
\red38\green38\blue38;\red0\green0\blue102;\red255\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c37255\c28627\c47843;\csgenericrgb\c19608\c47059\c77647;\csgenericrgb\c0\c69020\c31373;
\csgenericrgb\c14902\c14902\c14902;\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c40000;\csgenericrgb\c100000\c0\c0;}
\vieww12000\viewh15840\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 1\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.\
\cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Now the earth was formless and desolate, and there was darkness upon the surface of the watery deep, and God\'92s active force was moving about over the surface of the waters.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0And God said: \'93Let there be light.\'94 Then there was light. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0After that God saw that the light was good, and God began to divide the light from the darkness. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0God called the light Day, but the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, a first day.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let there be an expanse between the waters, and let there be a division between the waters and the waters.\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then God went on to make the expanse and divided the waters beneath the expanse from the waters above the expanse. And it was so. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let the waters under the heavens be collected together into one place, and let the dry land appear.\'94 And it was so. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0God called the dry land Earth, but the collecting of the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let the earth cause grass to sprout, seed-bearing plants and fruit trees according to their kinds, yielding fruit along with seed on the earth.\'94 And it was so. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And the earth began to produce grass, seed-bearing plants and trees yielding fruit along with seed, according to their kinds. Then God saw that it was good. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let there be luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to make a division between the day and the night, and they will serve as signs for seasons and for days and years. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0They will serve as luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth.\'94 And it was so. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0And God went on to make the two great luminaries, the greater luminary for dominating the day and the lesser luminary for dominating the night, and also the stars. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Thus God put them in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0and to dominate by day and by night and to make a division between the light and the darkness. Then God saw that it was good. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let the waters swarm with living creatures, and let flying creatures fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.\'94 \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And God created the great sea creatures and all living creatures that move and swarm in the waters according to their kinds and every winged flying creature according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0With that God blessed them, saying: \'93Be fruitful and become many and fill the waters of the sea, and let the flying creatures become many in the earth.\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds, domestic animals and creeping animals and wild animals of the earth according to their kinds.\'94 And it was so. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0And God went on to make the wild animals of the earth according to their kinds and the domestic animals according to their kinds and all the creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.\'94 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0And God went on to create the man in his image, in God\'92s image he created him; male and female he created them. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: \'93Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.\'94\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Then God said: \'93Here I have given to you every seed-bearing plant that is on the entire earth and every tree with seed-bearing fruit. Let them serve as food for you. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0And to every wild animal of the earth and to every flying creature of the heavens and to everything moving on the earth in which there is life, I have given all green vegetation for food.\'94 And it was so.\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0After that God saw everything he had made, and look! it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 2\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0And by the seventh day, God had completed the work that he had been doing, and he began to rest on the seventh day from all his work that he had been doing. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0And God went on to bless the seventh day and to declare it sacred, for on it God has been resting from all the work that he has created, all that he purposed to make.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0This is a history of the heavens and the earth in the time they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0No bush of the field was yet on the earth and no vegetation of the field had begun sprouting, because Jehovah God had not made it rain on the earth and there was no man to cultivate the ground. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0But a mist would go up from the earth, and it watered the entire surface of the ground.\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Further, Jehovah God planted a garden in Eden, toward the east; and there he put the man whom he had formed. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Thus Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food and also the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and bad.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Now there was a river flowing out of Eden to water the garden, and from there it divided into four rivers. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0The name of the first is Pishon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0The gold of that land is good. Bdellium gum and onyx stone are also there. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0The name of the second river is Gihon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Cush. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0The name of the third river is Hiddekel; it is the one going to the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Jehovah God took the man and settled him in the garden of Eden to cultivate it and to take care of it. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Jehovah God also gave this command to the man: \'93From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah God said: \'93It is not good for the man to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Now Jehovah God had been forming from the ground every wild animal of the field and every flying creature of the heavens, and he began bringing them to the man to see what he would call each one; and whatever the man would call each living creature, that became its name. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So the man named all the domestic animals and the flying creatures of the heavens and every wild animal of the field, but for man there was no helper as a complement of him. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0So Jehovah God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping, he took one of his ribs and then closed up the flesh over its place. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah God built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman, and he brought her to the man.\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then the man said:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93This is at last bone of my bones\
And flesh of my flesh.\
This one will be called Woman,\
Because from man she was taken.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0And both of them continued to be naked, the man and his wife; yet they were not ashamed.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 3\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now the serpent was the most cautious of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: \'93Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0At this the woman said to the serpent: \'93We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: \'91You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.\'92\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0At this the serpent said to the woman: \'93You certainly will not die. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.\'94\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Consequently, the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes, yes, the tree was pleasing to look at. So she began taking of its fruit and eating it. Afterward, she also gave some to her husband when he was with her, and he began eating it. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized that they were naked. So they sewed fig leaves together and made loin coverings for themselves.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Later they heard the voice of Jehovah God as he was walking in the garden about the breezy part of the day, and the man and his wife hid from the face of Jehovah God among the trees of the garden. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah God kept calling to the man and saying to him: \'93Where are you?\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Finally he said: \'93I heard your voice in the garden, but I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid myself.\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0At that he said: \'93Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree from which I commanded you not to eat?\'94 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0The man said: \'93The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, so I ate.\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Jehovah God then said to the woman: \'93What is this you have done?\'94 The woman replied: \'93The serpent deceived me, so I ate.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah God said to the serpent: \'93Because you have done this, you are the cursed one out of all the domestic animals and out of all the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go, and you will eat dust all the days of your life. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.\'94\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0To the woman he said: \'93I will greatly increase the pain of your pregnancy; in pain you will give birth to children, and your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.\'94\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0And to Adam he said: \'93Because you listened to your wife\'92s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, \'91You must not eat from it,\'92 cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.\'94\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0After this Adam named his wife Eve, because she was to become the mother of everyone living. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah God made long garments from skins for Adam and for his wife, to clothe them. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Jehovah God then said: \'93Here the man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad. Now in order that he may not put his hand out and take fruit also from the tree of life and eat and live forever,\'97\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0With that Jehovah God expelled him from the garden of Eden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0So he drove the man out, and he posted at the east of the garden of Eden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning continuously to guard the way to the tree of life.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 4\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Adam had sexual relations with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant. When she gave birth to Cain, she said: \'93I have produced a male child with the help of Jehovah.\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Later she again gave birth, to his brother Abel.\
Abel became a shepherd of the flock, but Cain became a cultivator of the ground. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0After some time, Cain brought some fruits of the land as an offering to Jehovah. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0But Abel brought some firstlings of his flock, including their fat. While Jehovah looked with favor on Abel and on his offering, \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0he did not look with any favor on Cain and on his offering. So Cain grew hot with anger and was dejected. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah said to Cain: \'93Why are you so angry and dejected? \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0If you turn to doing good, will you not be restored to favor? But if you do not turn to doing good, sin is crouching at the door, and its craving is to dominate you; but will you get the mastery over it?\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0After that Cain said to his brother Abel: \'93Let us go over into the field.\'94 So while they were in the field, Cain assaulted his brother Abel and killed him. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Later on, Jehovah said to Cain: \'93Where is your brother Abel?\'94 and he said: \'93I do not know. Am I my brother\'92s guardian?\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0At this He said: \'93What have you done? Listen! Your brother\'92s blood is crying out to me from the ground. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0And now you are cursed in banishment from the ground that has opened its mouth to receive your brother\'92s blood from your hand. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0When you cultivate the ground, it will not give you back its produce. You will become a wanderer and a fugitive in the earth.\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0At this Cain said to Jehovah: \'93The punishment for my error is too great to bear. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your face; and I will become a wanderer and a fugitive on the earth, and anyone who finds me will certainly kill me.\'94 \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0So Jehovah said to him: \'93For that reason, anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times.\'94\
So Jehovah set up a sign for Cain in order that no one finding him would strike him. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Then Cain went away from before Jehovah and took up residence in the land of Exile, to the east of Eden.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Afterward Cain had sexual relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Enoch. Then he engaged in building a city and named the city after his son Enoch. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Later Irad was born to Enoch. And Irad became father to Mehujael, and Mehujael became father to Methushael, and Methushael became father to Lamech.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Lamech took two wives for himself. The name of the first was Adah, and the name of the second was Zillah. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Adah gave birth to Jabal. He was the founder of those who dwell in tents and have livestock. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0His brother\'92s name was Jubal. He was the founder of all those who play the harp and the pipe. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Also, Zillah gave birth to Tubal-cain, who forged every sort of tool of copper and iron. And the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then Lamech composed these words for his wives Adah and Zillah:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93Hear my voice, you wives of Lamech;\
Give ear to my saying:\
A man I have killed for wounding me,\
Yes, a young man for striking me.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf4 24\cf6 \'a0If 7 times Cain is to be avenged,\
Then Lamech 77 times.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Adam again had sexual relations with his wife, and she gave birth to a son. She named him Seth because, as she said, \'93God has appointed for me another offspring in place of Abel, because Cain killed him.\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0There was also born to Seth a son, and he named him Enosh. At that time people began calling on the name of Jehovah.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 5\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0This is the book of Adam\'92s history. In the day that God created Adam, he made him in the likeness of God. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Male and female he created them. On the day they were created, he blessed them and named them Man.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Adam lived for 130 years and then became father to a son in his likeness, in his image, and he named him Seth. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Seth, Adam lived for 800 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Adam\'92s life amounted to 930 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Seth lived for 105 years and then became father to Enosh. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Enosh, Seth lived for 807 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Seth amounted to 912 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Enosh lived for 90 years and then became father to Kenan. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Kenan, Enosh lived for 815 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Enosh amounted to 905 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Kenan lived for 70 years and then became father to Mahalalel. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Mahalalel, Kenan lived for 840 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Kenan amounted to 910 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Mahalalel lived for 65 years and then became father to Jared. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Jared, Mahalalel lived for 830 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Mahalalel amounted to 895 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Jared lived for 162 years and then became father to Enoch. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Enoch, Jared lived for 800 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Jared amounted to 962 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Enoch lived for 65 years and then became father to Methuselah. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Methuselah, Enoch continued to walk with the true God for 300 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Enoch amounted to 365 years. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Enoch kept walking with the true God. Then he was no more, for God took him.\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Methuselah lived for 187 years and then became father to Lamech. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Lamech, Methuselah lived for 782 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Methuselah amounted to 969 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Lamech lived for 182 years and then became father to a son. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0He named him Noah, saying: \'93This one will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed.\'94 \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Noah, Lamech lived for 595 years. And he became father to sons and daughters. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Lamech amounted to 777 years, and then he died.\
\cf4 32\cf5 \'a0After Noah reached 500 years of age, he became father to Shem, Ham, and Japheth.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 6\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now when men started to grow in number on the surface of the ground and daughters were born to them, \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0the sons of the true God began to notice that the daughters of men were beautiful. So they began taking as wives all whom they chose. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah said: \'93My spirit will not tolerate man indefinitely, because he is only flesh. Accordingly, his days will amount to 120 years.\'94\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0The Nephilim were on the earth in those days and afterward. During that time the sons of the true God continued to have relations with the daughters of men, and these bore sons to them. They were the mighty ones of old times, the men of fame.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Consequently, Jehovah saw that man\'92s wickedness was great on the earth and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0So Jehovah said: \'93I am going to wipe men whom I have created off the surface of the ground, man together with domestic animals, creeping animals, and flying creatures of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them.\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Noah.\
Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries. Noah walked with the true God. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0In time Noah became father to three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0But the earth had become ruined in the sight of the true God, and the earth was filled with violence. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Yes, God looked upon the earth, and it was ruined; all flesh had ruined its way on the earth.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0After that God said to Noah: \'93I have decided to put an end to all flesh, because the earth is full of violence on account of them, so I am bringing them to ruin together with the earth. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Make for yourself an ark from resinous wood. You will make compartments in the ark and cover it with tar inside and outside. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0This is how you will make it: The ark should be 300 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0You will make a window for light for the ark, one cubit from the top. You should put the entrance of the ark in its side and make it with a lower deck, a second deck, and a third deck.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0\'93As for me, I am going to bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens all flesh that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0And I am establishing my covenant with you, and you must go into the ark, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons\'92 wives with you. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And bring into the ark two of every sort of living creature in order to preserve them alive with you, a male and a female; \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0of the flying creatures according to their kinds, the domestic animals according to their kinds, and all creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds, two of each will go in there to you to preserve them alive. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0For your part, you are to collect and take with you every kind of food to eat, to serve as food for you and for the animals.\'94\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0And Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. He did just so.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 7\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0After that Jehovah said to Noah: \'93Go into the ark, you and all your household, because you are the one I have found to be righteous before me among this generation. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0You must take with you every kind of clean animal by sevens, the male and its mate; and of every animal that is not clean just two, the male and its mate; \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0also of the flying creatures of the sky by sevens, male and female, to preserve their offspring alive over all the earth. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0For in just seven days, I will make it rain on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights, and I will wipe from the surface of the ground every living thing that I have made.\'94 \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Then Noah did everything that Jehovah had commanded him.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters came upon the earth. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0So Noah, along with his sons, his wife, and his sons\'92 wives, went into the ark ahead of the floodwaters. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Of every clean animal and of every animal that is not clean and of the flying creatures and of everything that moves on the ground, \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0they went inside the ark to Noah by twos, male and female, just as God had commanded Noah. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0And seven days later the floodwaters came upon the earth.\
\cf4 11\cf5 \'a0In the 600th year of Noah\'92s life, in the second month, on the 17th day of the month, on that day all the springs of the vast watery deep burst open and the floodgates of the heavens were opened. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And the rain poured down on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0On that very day, Noah went into the ark along with his sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and his wife and the three wives of his sons. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0They went in with every wild animal according to its kind, and every domestic animal according to its kind, and every creeping animal of the earth according to its kind, and every flying creature according to its kind, every bird, every winged creature. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0They kept going to Noah inside the ark, two by two, of every sort of flesh that has the breath of life. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0So they went in, male and female of every sort of flesh, just as God had commanded him. After that Jehovah shut the door behind him.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0The flooding continued for 40 days on the earth, and the waters kept increasing and began carrying the ark, and it was floating high above the earth. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0The waters became overwhelming and kept increasing greatly upon the earth, but the ark floated on the surface of the waters. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0The waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly that all the tall mountains under the whole heavens were covered. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0The waters rose up to 15 cubits above the mountains.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0So all living creatures that were moving on the earth perished\'97the flying creatures, the domestic animals, the wild animals, the swarming creatures, and all mankind. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So He wiped every living thing from the surface of the earth, including man, animals, creeping animals, and the flying creatures of the sky. They were all wiped off the earth; only Noah and those with him in the ark survived. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0And the waters continued overwhelming the earth for 150 days.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 8\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0But God gave attention to Noah and to all the wild animals and domestic animals that were with him in the ark, and God caused a wind to blow over the earth, and the waters began to subside. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0The springs of the watery deep and the floodgates of the heavens were stopped up, so the rain from the heavens stopped falling. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then the waters began to recede progressively from the earth. By the end of 150 days, the waters had subsided. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0In the seventh month, on the 17th day of the month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0And the waters were steadily decreasing until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first of the month, the tops of the mountains appeared.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So at the end of 40 days, Noah opened the window that he had made in the ark \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0and sent out a raven; it continued flying outside and returning, until the waters dried off the earth.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Later he sent out a dove to see whether the waters had receded from the surface of the ground. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0The dove did not find any resting-place to perch, so it returned to him into the ark because the waters were still covering the surface of the whole earth. So he reached his hand out and brought it inside the ark. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0He waited seven more days, and once again he sent out the dove from the ark. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0When the dove came to him toward evening, he saw that there was a freshly plucked olive leaf in its bill! So Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0He waited still another seven days. Then he sent out the dove, but it did not return to him anymore.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Now in the 601st year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the waters had drained from the earth; and Noah removed the covering of the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was drying. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0In the second month, on the 27th day of the month, the earth had dried off.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0God now said to Noah: \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0\'93Go out of the ark, you, your wife, your sons, and your sons\'92 wives. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Bring out with you all the living creatures of every sort of flesh, of the flying creatures and of the animals and of all the creeping animals of the earth, that they may multiply on the earth and be fruitful and become many on the earth.\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0So Noah went out, together with his sons, his wife, and his sons\'92 wives. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Every living creature, every creeping animal and every flying creature, everything that moves on the earth, went out of the ark by families. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Then Noah built an altar to Jehovah and took some of all the clean animals and of all the clean flying creatures and offered burnt offerings on the altar. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing aroma. So Jehovah said in his heart: \'93Never again will I curse the ground on man\'92s account, for the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up; and never again will I strike down every living thing as I have done. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0From now on, the earth will never cease to have seed-sowing and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 9\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0God went on to bless Noah and his sons and to say to them: \'93Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0A fear of you and a terror of you will continue upon every living creature of the earth and upon every flying creature of the heavens, upon everything that moves on the ground and upon all the fish of the sea. They are now given into your hand. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you. Just as I gave you the green vegetation, I give them all to you. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Only flesh with its life\'97its blood\'97you must not eat. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Besides that, I will demand an accounting for your lifeblood. I will demand an accounting from every living creature; and from each man I will demand an accounting for the life of his brother. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Anyone shedding man\'92s blood, by man will his own blood be shed, for in God\'92s image He made man. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0As for you, be fruitful and become many, and increase abundantly on the earth and multiply.\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him: \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0\'93I am now establishing my covenant with you and with your offspring after you, \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the animals, and all the living creatures of the earth with you, all those that came out of the ark\'97every living creature of the earth. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Yes, I establish my covenant with you: Never again will all flesh be destroyed by the waters of a flood, and never again will a flood bring the earth to ruin.\'94\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And God added: \'93This is the sign of the covenant that I am making between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0I put my rainbow in the cloud, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth, then the rainbow will certainly appear in the cloud. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And I will certainly remember my covenant that I made between me and you and every living creature of every kind; and never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all flesh. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0And the rainbow will occur in the cloud, and I will certainly see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of every kind on the earth.\'94\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0God repeated to Noah: \'93This is the sign of the covenant that I establish between me and all flesh that is on the earth.\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Noah\'92s sons who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Ham later became the father of Canaan. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0These three were Noah\'92s sons, and all the earth\'92s population came from them and spread abroad.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Now Noah started off as a farmer, and he planted a vineyard. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0When he drank of the wine, he became intoxicated, and he uncovered himself inside his tent. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his father\'92s nakedness, and he told his two brothers outside. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So Shem and Japheth took a garment and put it upon both their shoulders and walked in backward. Thus they covered their father\'92s nakedness while their faces were turned away, and they did not see their father\'92s nakedness.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0When Noah woke up from his wine and learned what his youngest son had done to him, \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0he said:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93Cursed be Canaan.\
Let him become the lowest slave to his brothers.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0And he added:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93Praised be Jehovah, the God of Shem,\
And let Canaan become a slave to him.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf4 27\cf6 \'a0Let God grant ample space to Japheth,\
And let him reside in the tents of Shem.\
Let Canaan become a slave to him also.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Noah continued to live for 350 years after the Flood. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0So all the days of Noah amounted to 950 years, and he died.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 10\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Noah\'92s sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.\
Sons were born to them after the Flood. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0The sons of Japheth were Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0The sons of Gomer were Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0The sons of Javan were Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0From these the inhabitants of the islands spread into their lands, according to their languages and their families and by their nations.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0The sons of Cush were Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca.\
The sons of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Cush became father to Nimrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0He became a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah. That is why there is a saying: \'93Just like Nimrod, a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0From that land he went into Assyria and built Nineveh, Rehoboth-Ir, Calah, \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0and Resen, between Nineveh and Calah: This is the great city.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Mizraim became father to Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim, \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Pathrusim, Casluhim (from whom the Philistines came), and Caphtorim.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Canaan became father to Sidon, his firstborn, and Heth, \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0as well as the Jebusite, the Amorite, the Girgashite, \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0the Hivite, the Arkite, the Sinite, \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0the Arvadite, the Zemarite, and the Hamathite. Afterward, the families of the Canaanites were scattered. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0So the boundary of the Canaanites was from Sidon as far as Gerar, near Gaza, as far as Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, near Lasha. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0These were the sons of Ham according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Children were also born to Shem, the forefather of all the sons of Eber and the brother of Japheth the oldest. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0The sons of Shem were Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram.\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0The sons of Aram were Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Arpachshad became father to Shelah, and Shelah became father to Eber.\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Two sons were born to Eber. The name of the one was Peleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Joktan.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Joktan became father to Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Obal, Abimael, Sheba, \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab; all of these were the sons of Joktan.\
\cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Their place of dwelling extended from Mesha as far as Sephar, the mountainous region of the East.\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0These were the sons of Shem according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.\
\cf4 32\cf5 \'a0These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their family lines and by their nations. From these the nations were spread abroad in the earth after the Flood.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 11\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now all the earth continued to be of one language and of one set of words. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0As they traveled eastward, they discovered a valley plain in the land of Shinar, and they began dwelling there. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then they said to one another: \'93Come! Let us make bricks and bake them with fire.\'94 So they used bricks instead of stone, and bitumen as mortar. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0They now said: \'93Come! Let us build a city for ourselves and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a celebrated name for ourselves, so that we will not be scattered over the entire face of the earth.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah went down to see the city and the tower that the sons of men had built. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Jehovah then said: \'93Look! They are one people with one language, and this is what they have started to do. Now there is nothing that they may have in mind to do that will be impossible for them. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Come! Let us go down there and confuse their language in order that they may not understand one another\'92s language.\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0So Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth, and they gradually left off building the city. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0That is why it was named Babel, because there Jehovah confused the language of all the earth, and Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Shem.\
Shem was 100 years old when he became father to Arpachshad two years after the Flood. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Arpachshad, Shem continued to live 500 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Arpachshad lived for 35 years and then became father to Shelah. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Shelah, Arpachshad continued to live 403 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Shelah lived for 30 years and then became father to Eber. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Eber, Shelah continued to live 403 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Eber lived for 34 years and then became father to Peleg. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Peleg, Eber continued to live 430 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Peleg lived for 30 years and then became father to Reu. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Reu, Peleg continued to live 209 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Reu lived for 32 years and then became father to Serug. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Serug, Reu continued to live 207 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Serug lived for 30 years and then became father to Nahor. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Nahor, Serug continued to live 200 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Nahor lived for 29 years and then became father to Terah. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0After becoming father to Terah, Nahor continued to live 119 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Terah lived for 70 years, after which he became father to Abram, Nahor, and Haran.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Terah.\
Terah became father to Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran became father to Lot. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0While his father Terah was still alive, Haran died in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldeans. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Abram and Nahor took wives for themselves. The name of Abram\'92s wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor\'92s wife was Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and Iscah. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Now Sarai was barren; she had no child.\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0Terah then took Abram his son and Lot his grandson, the son of Haran, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, the wife of Abram his son, and they went with him out of Ur of the Chaldeans to go to the land of Canaan. In time they came to Haran and began dwelling there. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0The days of Terah were 205 years. Then Terah died in Haran.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 12\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah said to Abram: \'93Go out from your land and away from your relatives and from the house of your father to the land that I will show you. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great, and you will become a blessing. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who calls down evil on you, and all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed by means of you.\'94\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0So Abram went just as Jehovah had told him, and Lot went with him. Abram was 75 years old when he left Haran. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Abram took his wife Sarai and Lot the son of his brother and all the goods that they had accumulated and the people whom they had acquired in Haran, and they set out for the land of Canaan. When they reached the land of Canaan, \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Abram traveled through the land as far as the site of Shechem, near the big trees of Moreh. At that time the Canaanites were in the land. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Jehovah then appeared to Abram and said: \'93To your offspring I am going to give this land.\'94 So he built an altar there to Jehovah, who had appeared to him. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Later he moved from there to the mountainous region east of Bethel and pitched his tent with Bethel on the west and Ai on the east. There he built an altar to Jehovah and began to call on the name of Jehovah. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Afterward, Abram broke camp and journeyed toward the Negeb, moving his camp from one place to another.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Now a famine arose in the land, and Abram went down toward Egypt to reside there for a while, because the famine in the land was severe. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarai: \'93Please listen! I know what a beautiful woman you are. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0So when the Egyptians see you, they will surely say, \'91This is his wife.\'92 Then they will kill me but keep you alive. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Please say you are my sister, so that it may go well with me because of you, and my life will be spared.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0As soon as Abram entered Egypt, the Egyptians noticed that the woman was very beautiful. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And the princes of Pharaoh also saw her, and they began praising her to Pharaoh, so that the woman was taken to the house of Pharaoh. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0He treated Abram well because of her, and he acquired sheep, cattle, male and female donkeys, male and female servants, and camels. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah struck Pharaoh and his household with severe plagues because of Sarai, Abram\'92s wife. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0So Pharaoh called Abram and said: \'93What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife? \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Why did you say, \'91She is my sister,\'92 so that I was about to take her as my wife? Here is your wife. Take her and go!\'94 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So Pharaoh gave his men orders concerning him, and they sent him away with his wife and all that he had.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 13\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Abram then went up out of Egypt to the Negeb, he and his wife and all that he had, together with Lot. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Abram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0He camped in one place after another as he traveled from the Negeb to Bethel, until he arrived at the place where his tent had been between Bethel and Ai, \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0to the place where he had previously built an altar. There Abram called on the name of Jehovah.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Now Lot, who was traveling with Abram, also owned sheep, cattle, and tents. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So the land did not allow for all of them to stay in the same place; their goods had become so many that they could no longer dwell together. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0As a result, a quarrel arose between the herders of Abram\'92s livestock and the herders of Lot\'92s livestock. (At that time the Canaanites and the Perizzites were dwelling in the land.) \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0So Abram said to Lot: \'93Please, there should be no quarreling between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are brothers. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Is not the whole land available to you? Please, separate from me. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; but if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So Lot raised his eyes and saw that the whole district of the Jordan was a well-watered region (before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah), like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as far as Zoar. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then Lot chose for himself the whole district of the Jordan, and Lot moved his camp to the east. So they separated from each other. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Abram lived in the land of Canaan, but Lot lived among the cities of the district. Finally he set up his tent near Sodom. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Now the men of Sodom were wicked, gross sinners against Jehovah.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Jehovah said to Abram, after Lot had separated from him: \'93Raise your eyes, please, and look from the place where you are, to the north and south, east and west, \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0because all the land that you see, I will give to you and your offspring as a lasting possession. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0And I will make your offspring like the dust particles of the earth, so that if anyone could count the dust particles of the earth, then your offspring could be counted. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Get up, travel through the length and breadth of the land, for to you I am going to give it.\'94 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0So Abram continued to live in tents. Later he came and dwelled among the big trees of Mamre, which are in Hebron, and there he built an altar to Jehovah.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 14\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim, \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0these made war with Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, that is, Zoar. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0All of these joined forces at the Valley of Siddim, that is, the Salt Sea.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0They had served Chedorlaomer for 12 years, but they rebelled in the 13th year. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0So in the 14th year, Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him came and defeated the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim, \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0and the Horites in their mountain of Seir down to El-paran, which is at the wilderness. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then they turned back and came to En-mishpat, that is, Kadesh, and conquered the whole territory of the Amalekites and also the Amorites who were dwelling in Hazazon-tamar.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0At this point, the king of Sodom went on the march, and also the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, that is, Zoar, and they drew up in battle formation against them in the Valley of Siddim, \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar\'97four kings against the five. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Now the Valley of Siddim was full of bitumen pits, and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah tried to escape and fell into them, and those who remained fled to the mountainous region. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then the victors took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their food and went on their way. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0They also took Lot, the son of Abram\'92s brother who was dwelling in Sodom, as well as his goods, and they continued on their way.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0After that a man who had escaped came and told Abram the Hebrew. He was then dwelling among the big trees of Mamre the Amorite, the brother of Eshcol and Aner. These men were allies of Abram. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Thus Abram heard that his relative had been taken captive. With that he mobilized his trained men, 318 servants born in his household, and went in pursuit up to Dan. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0During the night, he divided his forces, and he and his servants attacked and defeated them. And he pursued them up to Hobah, which is north of Damascus. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0He recovered all the goods, and he also recovered Lot his relative, his goods, the women, and the other people.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0After Abram returned from defeating Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet Abram at the Valley of Shaveh, that is, the Valley of the King. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0And Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine; he was priest of the Most High God.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Then he blessed him and said:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93Blessed be Abram by the Most High God,\
Maker of heaven and earth;\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf4 20\cf6 \'a0And praised be the Most High God,\
Who has handed your oppressors over to you!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf5 And Abram gave him a tenth of everything.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0After that the king of Sodom said to Abram: \'93Give me the people, but take the goods for yourself.\'94 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0But Abram said to the king of Sodom: \'93I raise my hand in an oath to Jehovah the Most High God, Maker of heaven and earth, \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0that I will not take anything that is yours, from a thread to a sandal lace, so that you may not say, \'91I made Abram rich.\'92 \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0I will take nothing except what the young men have already eaten. As for the share of the men who went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre\'97let them take their share.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 15\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0After this the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision, saying: \'93Do not fear, Abram. I am a shield for you. Your reward will be very great.\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Abram replied: \'93Sovereign Lord Jehovah, what will you give me, seeing that I continue childless and the one who will inherit my house is a man of Damascus, Eliezer?\'94 \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Abram added: \'93You have given me no offspring, and a member of my household is succeeding me as heir.\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0But look! Jehovah\'92s word in reply to him was, \'93This man will not succeed you as heir, but your own son will succeed you as heir.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0He now brought him outside and said: \'93Look up, please, to the heavens and count the stars, if you are able to do so.\'94 Then he said to him: \'93So your offspring will become.\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0And he put faith in Jehovah, and He counted it to him as righteousness. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then he added: \'93I am Jehovah, who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as your possession.\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0To this he said: \'93Sovereign Lord Jehovah, how will I know that I will take possession of it?\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0He replied to him: \'93Take for me a three\cf7  year \cf5 old heifer, a three\cf7  year \cf5 old female goat, a three\cf7  year \cf5 old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So he took all of these and cut them in two and put each part opposite the other, but he did not cut up the birds. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then the birds of prey began to descend on the carcasses, but Abram kept driving them away.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0When the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Abram and a great and frightening darkness descended on him. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Then He said to Abram: \'93Know for certain that your offspring will be foreigners in a land not theirs and that the people there will enslave them and afflict them for 400 years. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0But I will judge the nation they will serve, and after that they will go out with many goods. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0As for you, you will go to your forefathers in peace; you will be buried at a good old age. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0But they will return here in the fourth generation, because the error of the Amorites has not yet reached its full measure.\'94\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0When the sun had set and it had become very dark, a smoking furnace appeared, and a fiery torch passed between the pieces. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0On that day Jehovah made with Abram a covenant, saying: \'93To your offspring I will give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates: \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0the land of the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim, \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 16\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Abram\'92s wife Sarai had borne him no children, but she had an Egyptian servant whose name was Hagar. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0So Sarai said to Abram: \'93Please now! Jehovah has prevented me from bearing children. Please, have relations with my servant. Perhaps I can have children by means of her.\'94 So Abram listened to what Sarai said. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0After Abram had lived for ten years in the land of Canaan, Abram\'92s wife Sarai took her Egyptian servant Hagar and gave her to her husband Abram as his wife. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0So he had relations with Hagar, and she became pregnant. When she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise her mistress.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0At this Sarai said to Abram: \'93The injury done to me is your fault. I was the one who put my servant in your arms, but when she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise me. May Jehovah judge between me and you.\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So Abram said to Sarai: \'93Look! Your servant is under your authority. Do to her whatever you think is best.\'94 Then Sarai humiliated her, and she ran away from her.\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Later Jehovah\'92s angel found her at a spring of waters in the wilderness, the spring on the way to Shur. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0And he said: \'93Hagar, servant of Sarai, where have you come from and where are you going?\'94 To this she said: \'93I am running away from my mistress Sarai.\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Jehovah\'92s angel then said to her: \'93Return to your mistress and humble yourself under her hand.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah\'92s angel said: \'93I will greatly multiply your offspring, so that they will be too numerous to count.\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Jehovah\'92s angel added: \'93Here you are pregnant, and you will give birth to a son, and you must name him Ishmael, for Jehovah has heard your affliction. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0He will be a wild donkey of a man. His hand will be against everyone, and everyone\'92s hand will be against him, and he will dwell opposite all his brothers.\'94\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Then she called on the name of Jehovah, who was speaking to her: \'93You are a God of sight,\'94 for she said: \'93Have I here actually looked upon the one who sees me?\'94 \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0That is why the well was called Beer-lahai-roi. (It is between Kadesh and Bered.) \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0So Hagar bore to Abram a son, and Abram named his son, whom Hagar bore, Ishmael. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Abram was 86 years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to him.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 17\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0When Abram was 99 years old, Jehovah appeared to Abram and said to him: \'93I am God Almighty. Walk before me and prove yourself faultless. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0I will establish my covenant between me and you, and I will multiply you very, very much.\'94\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0At this Abram fell facedown, and God continued to speak with him, saying: \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0\'93As for me, look! my covenant is with you, and you will certainly become a father of many nations. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Your name will no longer be Abram; your name will become Abraham, for I will make you a father of many nations. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0I will make you very, very fruitful and will make you become nations, and kings will come from you.\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0\'93And I will keep my covenant between me and you and your offspring after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your offspring after you. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0And I will give to you and to your offspring after you the land in which you lived as a foreigner\'97the entire land of Canaan\'97for a lasting possession, and I will be their God.\'94\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0God said further to Abraham: \'93As for you, you are to keep my covenant, you and your offspring after you throughout their generations. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0This is my covenant between me and you, that you and your offspring after you will keep: Every male among you must get circumcised. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0You must circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and you. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Throughout your generations, every male among you eight days old must be circumcised, anyone who is born in the house and anyone who is not one of your offspring and who was purchased with money from a foreigner. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Every man born in your house and every man purchased with your money must be circumcised, and my covenant in your flesh must serve as a lasting covenant. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0If any uncircumcised male will not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, that person must be cut off from his people. He has broken my covenant.\'94\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Then God said to Abraham: \'93As for your wife Sarai, you must not call her Sarai, because Sarah will become her name. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0I will bless her and also give you a son by her; I will bless her and she will become nations; kings of peoples will come from her.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0At this Abraham fell facedown and began to laugh and to say in his heart: \'93Will a man 100 years old have a child born to him, and will Sarah, a woman 90 years old, give birth?\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0So Abraham said to the true God: \'93O that Ishmael might live before you!\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0To this God said: \'93Your wife Sarah will definitely bear you a son, and you must name him Isaac. And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to his offspring after him. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0But as regards Ishmael, I have heard you. Look! I will bless him and will make him fruitful and will multiply him very, very much. He will produce 12 chieftains, and I will make him become a great nation. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0However, I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this appointed time next year.\'94\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0When God finished speaking with him, he went up from Abraham. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Abraham then took Ishmael his son and all the men born in his house and everyone he had purchased with money, every male in the household of Abraham, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins on that very day, just as God had spoken with him. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Abraham was 99 years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0And Ishmael his son was 13 years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0On that very day, Abraham was circumcised and also his son Ishmael. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0All the men of his household, anyone born in the house and anyone purchased with money from a foreigner, were also circumcised with him.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 18\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Afterward, Jehovah appeared to him among the big trees of Mamre while he was sitting at the entrance of the tent during the hottest part of the day. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0He looked up and saw three men standing some distance from him. When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of the tent to meet them, and he bowed down to the ground. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Jehovah, if I have found favor in your eyes, please do not pass by your servant. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Please, let a little water be brought and have your feet washed; then recline under the tree. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Seeing that you have come here to your servant, let me bring a piece of bread so that you may refresh yourselves. Then you may go on your way.\'94 At this they said: \'93All right. You may do as you have spoken.\'94\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So Abraham hurried to the tent to Sarah and said: \'93Quick! Get three measures of fine flour, knead the dough, and make loaves of bread.\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Next Abraham ran to the herd and chose a tender and good young bull. He gave it to the attendant, who hurried to prepare it. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0He then took butter and milk and the young bull that he had prepared and set the food before them. Then he stood by them under the tree as they were eating.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0They said to him: \'93Where is your wife Sarah?\'94 He replied: \'93Here in the tent.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So one of them continued: \'93I will surely return to you next year at this time, and look! your wife Sarah will have a son.\'94 Now Sarah was listening at the tent entrance, which was behind the man. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Abraham and Sarah were old, being advanced in years. Sarah was past the age of childbearing. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0So Sarah began to laugh to herself, saying: \'93After I am worn out and my lord is old, will I really have this pleasure?\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah said to Abraham: \'93Why did Sarah laugh and say, \'91Am I really going to give birth even though I am old?\'92 \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Is anything too extraordinary for Jehovah? I will return to you next year at this appointed time, and Sarah will have a son.\'94 \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0But Sarah denied it, saying, \'93I did not laugh!\'94 for she was afraid. At this he said: \'93Yes! You did laugh.\'94\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0When the men got up to leave and looked down toward Sodom, Abraham was walking with them to escort them. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Jehovah said: \'93Am I keeping hidden from Abraham what I am going to do? \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Why, Abraham is surely going to become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed by means of him. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0For I have come to know him in order that he may command his sons and his household after him to keep Jehovah\'92s way by doing what is right and just, so that Jehovah may bring about what he has promised concerning Abraham.\'94\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah said: \'93The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is indeed great, and their sin is very heavy. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0I will go down to see whether they are acting according to the outcry that has reached me. And if not, I can get to know it.\'94\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Then the men left from there and went toward Sodom, but Jehovah remained with Abraham. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then Abraham approached and said: \'93Will you really sweep away the righteous with the wicked? \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Suppose there are 50 righteous men within the city. Will you, then, sweep them away and not pardon the place for the sake of the 50 righteous who are inside it? \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0It is unthinkable that you would act in this manner by putting the righteous man to death with the wicked one so that the outcome for the righteous man and the wicked is the same! It is unthinkable of you. Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right?\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah said: \'93If I find in Sodom 50 righteous men in the city, I will pardon the whole place for their sake.\'94 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0But Abraham again responded: \'93Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah, whereas I am dust and ashes. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Suppose the 50 righteous should lack five. Because of the five will you destroy the whole city?\'94 To this he said: \'93I will not destroy it if I find there 45.\'94\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0But yet again he spoke to him and said: \'93Suppose 40 are found there.\'94 He answered: \'93I will not do it for the sake of the 40.\'94 \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0But he continued: \'93Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me go on speaking: Suppose only 30 are found there.\'94 He answered: \'93I will not do it if I find 30 there.\'94 \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0But he continued: \'93Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah: Suppose only 20 are found there.\'94 He answered: \'93I will not destroy it for the sake of the 20.\'94 \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0Finally he said: \'93Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me speak just once more: Suppose only ten are found there.\'94 He answered: \'93I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.\'94 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0When Jehovah finished speaking to Abraham, he went his way and Abraham returned to his place.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 19\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0The two angels arrived at Sodom by evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the earth. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0And he said: \'93Please, my lords, turn aside, please, into the house of your servant and stay overnight and have your feet washed. Then you may get up early and travel on your way.\'94 To this they said: \'93No, we will stay overnight in the public square.\'94 \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0But he was so insistent with them that they went with him to his house. Then he made a feast for them, and he baked unleavened bread, and they ate.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Before they could lie down to sleep, the men of the city\'97the men of Sodom from boy to old man, all of them\'97surrounded the house in one mob. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0And they kept calling out to Lot and saying to him: \'93Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may have sex with them.\'94\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Then Lot went out to them to the doorway, and he shut the door behind him. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0He said: \'93Please, my brothers, do not act wickedly. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Please, here I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with a man. Please, let me bring them out to you for you to do to them whatever seems good to you. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the shelter of my roof.\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0At this they said: \'93Stand back!\'94 And they added: \'93This lone foreigner came to live here, and yet he dares to judge us! Now we are going to do worse to you than to them.\'94 And they crowded in on Lot and moved forward to break down the door. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So the men reached out their hands and brought Lot into the house with them, and they shut the door. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0But they struck the men who were at the entrance of the house with blindness, from the least to the greatest, so that they wore themselves out trying to find the doorway.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then the men said to Lot: \'93Do you have anyone else here? Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and all your people in the city, bring out of this place! \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0For we are going to destroy this place, because the outcry against them has indeed grown great before Jehovah, so that Jehovah sent us to destroy the city.\'94 \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So Lot went out and began to speak to his sons-in-law who were to marry his daughters, and he kept saying: \'93Get up! Get out of this place, because Jehovah will destroy the city!\'94 But to his sons-in-law, he seemed to be joking.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0As dawn was breaking, the angels became urgent with Lot, saying: \'93Get up! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here with you, so that you will not be swept away in the error of the city!\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0When he kept lingering, then because of Jehovah\'92s compassion for him, the men seized hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, and they brought him out and stationed him outside the city. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0As soon as they had brought them to the outskirts, he said: \'93Escape for your life! Do not look behind you and do not stand still in any part of the district! Escape to the mountainous region so that you may not be swept away!\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Then Lot said to them: \'93Not there, please, Jehovah! \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Please, now, your servant has found favor in your eyes and you are showing great kindness to me by preserving me alive, but I am not able to flee to the mountainous region because I am afraid that disaster may overtake me and I will die. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Please, now, this town is nearby and I can flee there; it is only a small place. May I, please, escape there? It is only a small place. Then I will survive.\'94 \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0So he said to him: \'93Very well, I will also show you consideration by not overthrowing the town you speak of. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Hurry! Escape there, because I cannot do anything until you arrive there!\'94 That is why he named the town Zoar.\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0The sun had risen over the land when Lot arrived at Zoar. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah made it rain sulfur and fire on Sodom and Gomorrah\'97it came from Jehovah, from the heavens. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0So he overthrew these cities, yes, the entire district, including all the inhabitants of the cities and the plants of the ground. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0But Lot\'92s wife, who was behind him, began to look back, and she became a pillar of salt.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Now Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0When he looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah and all the land of the district, he saw quite a sight. There was dense smoke rising from the land like the dense smoke of a kiln! \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0So when God destroyed the cities of the district, God kept Abraham in mind by sending Lot out from the cities he overthrew, the cities where Lot had been dwelling.\
\cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Later Lot went up from Zoar with his two daughters and began living in the mountainous region, because he was afraid to live in Zoar. So he began living in a cave with his two daughters. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0And the firstborn said to the younger: \'93Our father is old, and there is not a man in the land to have relations with us according to the custom of the whole earth. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0Come, let us give our father wine to drink, and let us lie down with him and preserve offspring from our father.\'94\
\cf4 33\cf5 \'a0So that night they kept giving their father wine to drink; then the firstborn went in and lay down with her father, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0Then on the next day, the firstborn said to the younger: \'93Here I lay down with my father last night. Let us give him wine to drink tonight also. Then you go in and lie down with him, and let us preserve offspring from our father.\'94 \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0So that night also, they repeatedly gave their father wine to drink; then the younger went and lay down with him, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up. \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0So both daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father. \cf4 37\cf5 \'a0The firstborn gave birth to a son and named him Moab. He is the father of the Moabites of today. \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0The younger also gave birth to a son, and she named him Ben-ammi. He is the father of the Ammonites of today.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 20\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Abraham moved his camp from there to the land of the Negeb and began dwelling between Kadesh and Shur. While he was residing at Gerar, \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Abraham repeated concerning his wife Sarah: \'93She is my sister.\'94 So Abimelech king of Gerar sent for Sarah and took her. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Afterward, God came by night to Abimelech in a dream and said to him: \'93Here you are as good as dead because of the woman whom you have taken, since she is married and belongs to another man.\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0However, Abimelech had not gone near her. So he said: \'93Jehovah, will you kill a nation that is really innocent? \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Did he not say to me, \'91She is my sister,\'92 and did she too not say, \'91He is my brother\'92? I did this with an honest heart and innocent hands.\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Then the true God said to him in the dream: \'93I know that you did this with an honest heart, so I held you back from sinning against me. That is why I did not allow you to touch her. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Now return the man\'92s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will make supplication for you and you will keep living. But if you are not returning her, know that you will surely die, you and all who are yours.\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Abimelech got up early in the morning and called all his servants and told them all these things, and they became very frightened. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Then Abimelech called Abraham and said to him: \'93What have you done to us? What sin have I committed against you that you would bring upon me and my kingdom such a great sin? What you have done to me was not right.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0And Abimelech went on to say to Abraham: \'93What were your intentions when you did this thing?\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Abraham said: \'93It was because I said to myself, \'91Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.\'92 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0So when God caused me to wander from the house of my father, I said to her: \'91Let this be how you show loyal love to me: Everywhere we go, say of me, \'93He is my brother.\'94\'92\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Abimelech then took sheep and cattle and male and female servants and gave them to Abraham, and he returned his wife Sarah to him. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Abimelech also said: \'93Here my land is available to you. Dwell wherever you please.\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0And to Sarah he said: \'93Here I give 1,000 pieces of silver to your brother. It is a sign of your innocence to all who are with you and before everybody, and you are cleared of reproach.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0And Abraham began to make supplication to the true God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife and his slave girls, and they began having children; \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0for Jehovah had made all the women of the house of Abimelech barren because of Sarah, Abraham\'92s wife.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 21\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Jehovah turned his attention to Sarah just as he had said, and Jehovah did for Sarah what he had promised. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0So Sarah became pregnant and then bore a son to Abraham in his old age at the appointed time God had promised him. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Abraham named his newborn son, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, just as God had commanded him. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Abraham was 100 years old when his son Isaac was born to him. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Then Sarah said: \'93God has brought me laughter; everybody hearing of it will laugh with me.\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0And she added: \'93Who would have said to Abraham, \'91Sarah will certainly nurse children\'92? Yet, I have given birth to a son for him in his old age.\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Now the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham prepared a big feast on the day that Isaac was weaned. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0But Sarah kept noticing that the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, was mocking Isaac. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So she said to Abraham: \'93Drive out this slave girl and her son, for the son of this slave girl is not going to be an heir along with my son, with Isaac!\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0But what she said about his son was very displeasing to Abraham. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then God said to Abraham: \'93Do not be displeased by what Sarah is saying to you about the boy and about your slave girl. Listen to her, for what will be called your offspring will be through Isaac. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0As for the son of the slave girl, I will also make a nation out of him, because he is your offspring.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So Abraham got up early in the morning and took bread and a skin bottle of water and gave it to Hagar. He set these on her shoulder and then sent her away along with the boy. So she departed and wandered about in the wilderness of Beer-sheba. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Finally the water in the skin bottle was used up, and she pushed the boy under one of the bushes. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Then she went on and sat down by herself, about the distance of a bowshot away, because she said: \'93I do not want to watch the boy die.\'94 So she sat down at a distance and began to cry aloud and to weep.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0At that God heard the voice of the boy, and God\'92s angel called to Hagar from the heavens and said to her: \'93What is the matter with you, Hagar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy there where he is. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Get up, lift the boy and take hold of him with your hand, for I will make him a great nation.\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Then God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the skin bottle with water and gave the boy a drink. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0And God was with the boy as he grew up. He lived in the wilderness and became an archer. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0He took up dwelling in the wilderness of Paran, and his mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0At that time Abimelech together with Phicol the chief of his army said to Abraham: \'93God is with you in everything you are doing. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So now swear to me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me and with my offspring and with my descendants, and that you will deal with me and with the land where you have been residing with the same loyal love that I have shown you.\'94 \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0So Abraham said: \'93I swear to this.\'94\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0However, Abraham complained to Abimelech about the well of water that the servants of Abimelech had violently seized. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Abimelech replied: \'93I do not know who did this; you did not tell me about it, and I heard nothing about it until today.\'94 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0At that Abraham took sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelech, and the two of them made a covenant. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0When Abraham set seven female lambs apart from the flock by themselves, \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Abimelech said to Abraham: \'93Why have you set these seven female lambs here by themselves?\'94 \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93You are to accept the seven female lambs from my hand as a witness that I dug this well.\'94 \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0That is why he called that place Beer-sheba, because there both of them had taken an oath. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0So they made a covenant at Beer-sheba, after which Abimelech got up together with Phicol the chief of his army, and they returned to the land of the Philistines. \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0After that he planted a tamarisk tree at Beer-sheba, and there he called on the name of Jehovah, the everlasting God. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0And Abraham stayed in the land of the Philistines for a long time.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 22\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now after this the true God put Abraham to the test, and he said to him: \'93Abraham!\'94 to which he replied: \'93Here I am!\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and travel to the land of Moriah and offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I will designate to you.\'94\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0So Abraham got up early in the morning and saddled his donkey and took two of his servants along with him and his son Isaac. He split the wood for the burnt offering, and then he rose and traveled to the place that the true God indicated to him. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0On the third day, Abraham looked up and saw the place from a distance. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Abraham now said to his servants: \'93You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.\'94\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on his son Isaac. Then he took in his hands the fire and the knife, and the two of them walked on together. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then Isaac said to his father Abraham: \'93My father!\'94 He replied: \'93Yes, my son!\'94 So he continued: \'93Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0To this Abraham said: \'93God himself will provide the sheep for the burnt offering, my son.\'94 And both of them walked on together.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Finally they reached the place that the true God had indicated to him, and Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac hand and foot and put him on the altar on top of the wood. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0But Jehovah\'92s angel called to him from the heavens and said: \'93Abraham, Abraham!\'94 to which he answered: \'93Here I am!\'94 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Do not harm the boy, and do not do anything at all to him, for now I do know that you are God-fearing because you have not withheld your son, your only one, from me.\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0At that Abraham looked up, and there just beyond him was a ram caught by its horns in a thicket. So Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0And Abraham named that place Jehovah-jireh. This is why it is still said today: \'93In the mountain of Jehovah it will be provided.\'94\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah\'92s angel called to Abraham a second time from the heavens, \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0saying: \'93\'91By myself I swear,\'92 declares Jehovah, \'91that because you have done this and you have not withheld your son, your only one, \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand on the seashore, and your offspring will take possession of the gate of his enemies. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0And by means of your offspring all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves because you have listened to my voice.\'92\'94\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0After that Abraham returned to his servants, and they got up and went back together to Beer-sheba; and Abraham continued to dwell at Beer-sheba.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0After this it was reported to Abraham: \'93Here Milcah has also borne sons to Nahor your brother: \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kemuel the father of Aram, \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel.\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. Milcah bore these eight to Nahor the brother of Abraham. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore sons: Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 23\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0And Sarah lived for 127 years; these were the years of Sarah\'92s life. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0So Sarah died in Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron, in the land of Canaan, and Abraham began to mourn and to weep over Sarah. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then Abraham got up from before his dead wife and he said to the sons of Heth: \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0\'93I am a foreigner and settler among you. Give me a property to serve as a burial place in your midst so that I may remove my dead for burial.\'94 \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0At this the sons of Heth answered Abraham: \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0\'93Hear us, my lord. You are a chieftain of God among us. You may bury your dead in the choicest of our burial places. None of us will hold back his burial place from you to prevent you from burying your dead.\'94\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0So Abraham got up and bowed down to the people of the land, to the sons of Heth, \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0and said to them: \'93If you agree to let me remove my dead for burial, then listen to me and urge Ephron the son of Zohar \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0to sell me the cave of Machpelah, which belongs to him; it is at the edge of his field. Let him sell it to me in your presence for the full amount of silver so that I may have a property for a burial place.\'94\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Now Ephron was sitting among the sons of Heth. So Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of the sons of Heth, and before all who entered the gate of his city, saying: \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0\'93No, my lord! Listen to me. I give you both the field and the cave that is in it. In the presence of the sons of my people, I give it to you. Bury your dead.\'94 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0At that Abraham bowed down before the people of the land \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0and spoke to Ephron in the hearing of the people, saying: \'93Listen to me, if you will! I will give you the full amount of silver for the field. Take it from me, in order that I may bury my dead there.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Then Ephron answered Abraham: \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0\'93My lord, listen to me. This land is worth 400 silver shekels, but what is that between me and you? So bury your dead.\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Abraham listened to Ephron, and Abraham weighed out to Ephron the amount of silver that he had mentioned in the hearing of the sons of Heth, 400 silver shekels according to the weight accepted by the merchants. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Thus the field of Ephron in Machpelah, which was in front of Mamre\'97the field and the cave in it and all the trees within the boundaries of the field\'97became confirmed as \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Abraham\'92s purchased property in the presence of the sons of Heth, before all those entering the gate of his city. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0After that Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of the field of Machpelah in front of Mamre, that is, Hebron, in the land of Canaan. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Thus the field and the cave that was in it were transferred by the sons of Heth to Abraham as property for a burial place.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 24\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Abraham was now old, advanced in years, and Jehovah had blessed Abraham in everything. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Abraham said to his servant, the oldest one of his household, who was managing all he had: \'93Please put your hand under my thigh, \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0and I will make you swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am dwelling. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0You must go instead to my country and to my relatives and take a wife for my son, for Isaac.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0However, the servant said to him: \'93What if the woman is not willing to come with me to this land? Must I then return your son to the land from which you came?\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0At this Abraham said to him: \'93See that you do not take my son there. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me from my father\'92s house and from the land of my relatives and who spoke with me and swore to me: \'91To your offspring I am going to give this land,\'92 he will send his angel ahead of you, and you will certainly take a wife for my son from there. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0But if the woman is unwilling to come with you, you will be free from this oath. But you must not take my son there.\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0With that the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him concerning this matter.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So the servant took ten of his master\'92s camels and departed, taking along all sorts of good things from his master. Then he went on his way to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0He had the camels kneel down at a well of water outside the city. It was about evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, please grant me success this day, and show your loyal love to my master Abraham. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Here I am standing at a spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0May it happen that the young woman to whom I say, \'91Please let down your water jar so that I may take a drink,\'92 and who replies, \'91Take a drink, and I will also water your camels,\'92 let this be the one you choose for your servant Isaac; and by this let me know that you have shown your loyal love to my master.\'94\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Even before he finished speaking, Rebekah, who was the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah the wife of Nahor, Abraham\'92s brother, came out with her water jar on her shoulder. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Now the young woman was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had had sexual relations with her. She went down to the spring, filled her water jar, and then came back up. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0At once the servant ran to meet her and said: \'93Please give me a little sip of water from your jar.\'94 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0In turn she said: \'93Drink, my lord.\'94 With that she quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and gave him a drink. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0When she finished giving him a drink, she said: \'93I will also draw water for your camels until they are done drinking.\'94 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So she quickly emptied her jar into the drinking trough and ran again and again to the well to draw water, and she kept drawing water for all his camels. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0The whole time the man silently stared at her in amazement, wondering whether Jehovah had made his trip successful or not.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out for her a gold nose ring weighing a half shekel and two bracelets of gold weighing ten shekels, \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0and he said: \'93Please tell me, whose daughter are you? Is there any room at your father\'92s house for us to spend the night?\'94 \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0At that she said to him: \'93I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor.\'94 \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0And she added: \'93We have both straw and much fodder and also a place to spend the night.\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then the man bowed down and prostrated himself before Jehovah \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0and said: \'93May Jehovah be praised, the God of my master Abraham, for he has not abandoned his loyal love and his faithfulness toward my master. Jehovah has guided me to the house of the brothers of my master.\'94\
\cf4 28\cf5 \'a0And the young woman ran to tell her mother\'92s household about these things. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Now Rebekah had a brother whose name was Laban. So Laban ran to the man who was outside at the spring. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0When he saw the nose ring and the bracelets on the hands of his sister and heard the words of his sister Rebekah, who was saying, \'93This is the way the man spoke to me,\'94 he came to meet the man, who was still there standing by the camels at the spring. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0At once he said: \'93Come, you who are blessed by Jehovah. Why do you keep standing out here? I have made the house ready and a place for the camels.\'94 \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0With that the man came into the house, and he unharnessed the camels and gave straw and fodder to the camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him. \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0However, when something to eat was set before him, he said: \'93I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.\'94 So Laban said: \'93Speak!\'94\
\cf4 34\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93I am Abraham\'92s servant. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah has blessed my master very much, and he has made him very wealthy by giving him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys. \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0Further, Sarah the wife of my master bore a son to my master after she grew old, and he will give him everything he has. \cf4 37\cf5 \'a0So my master made me swear, saying: \'91You must not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I am dwelling. \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0No, but you will go to the house of my father and to my family, and you must take a wife for my son.\'92 \cf4 39\cf5 \'a0But I said to my master: \'91What if the woman is unwilling to come with me?\'92 \cf4 40\cf5 \'a0He said to me: \'91Jehovah, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you and will certainly give success to your journey, and you must take a wife for my son from my family and from the house of my father. \cf4 41\cf5 \'a0You will be released from your oath to me if you go to my family and they will not give her to you. This will release you from your oath.\'92\
\cf4 42\cf5 \'a0\'93When I got to the spring today, I said: \'91Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, if you will make my journey successful, \cf4 43\cf5 \'a0here I am standing at a spring. What must take place is that when a young woman comes out to draw water, I will say, \'93Please, let me drink a little water from your jar,\'94 \cf4 44\cf5 \'a0and she will say to me, \'93You take a drink, and I will also draw water for your camels.\'94 Let that woman be the one whom Jehovah has chosen for the son of my master.\'92\
\cf4 45\cf5 \'a0\'93Before I was finished speaking in my heart, there was Rebekah coming out with her jar on her shoulder, and she made her way down to the spring and began to draw water. Then I said to her: \'91Give me a drink, please.\'92 \cf4 46\cf5 \'a0So she quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said: \'91Take a drink, and I will also water your camels.\'92 Then I took a drink, and she also watered the camels. \cf4 47\cf5 \'a0After that I asked her, \'91Whose daughter are you?\'92 to which she replied, \'91The daughter of Bethuel the son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore to him.\'92 So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her hands. \cf4 48\cf5 \'a0And I bowed down and prostrated myself before Jehovah and praised Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to take the daughter of the brother of my master for his son. \cf4 49\cf5 \'a0And now tell me if you wish to show loyal love and faithfulness toward my master; but if not, tell me, so that I may proceed one way or the other.\'94\
\cf4 50\cf5 \'a0Then Laban and Bethuel answered: \'93This is from Jehovah. We are not able to say yes or no to you. \cf4 51\cf5 \'a0Here is Rebekah before you. Take her and go, and let her become a wife to the son of your master, just as Jehovah has spoken.\'94 \cf4 52\cf5 \'a0When Abraham\'92s servant heard their words, he at once bowed down on the ground before Jehovah. \cf4 53\cf5 \'a0And the servant began to bring out articles of silver and of gold and garments and to give them to Rebekah, and he gave valuable things to her brother and to her mother. \cf4 54\cf5 \'a0After that he and the men with him ate and drank, and they spent the night there.\
When he got up in the morning, he said: \'93Send me off to my master.\'94 \cf4 55\cf5 \'a0To this her brother and her mother said: \'93Let the young woman stay with us at least ten days. Then she can go.\'94 \cf4 56\cf5 \'a0But he said to them: \'93Do not detain me, seeing that Jehovah has made my journey successful. Send me off, in order that I may go to my master.\'94 \cf4 57\cf5 \'a0So they said: \'93Let us call the young woman and inquire of her.\'94 \cf4 58\cf5 \'a0They called Rebekah and said to her: \'93Will you go with this man?\'94 She replied: \'93I am willing to go.\'94\
\cf4 59\cf5 \'a0So they sent off their sister Rebekah and her nurse and Abraham\'92s servant and his men. \cf4 60\cf5 \'a0And they blessed Rebekah and said to her: \'93Our sister, may you become thousands times ten thousand, and let your offspring take possession of the gate of those who hate them.\'94 \cf4 61\cf5 \'a0Then Rebekah and her female attendants rose, got on the camels, and followed the man. So the servant took Rebekah and went on his way.\
\cf4 62\cf5 \'a0Now Isaac had come from the direction of Beer-lahai-roi, for he was dwelling in the land of the Negeb. \cf4 63\cf5 \'a0And Isaac was out walking in the field about nightfall to meditate. When he looked up, why, he saw that camels were coming! \cf4 64\cf5 \'a0When Rebekah looked up, she caught sight of Isaac, and she quickly got down from the camel. \cf4 65\cf5 \'a0Then she asked the servant: \'93Who is that man there walking in the field to meet us?\'94 And the servant said: \'93It is my master.\'94 So she took her veil to cover herself. \cf4 66\cf5 \'a0And the servant told Isaac all the things he had done. \cf4 67\cf5 \'a0After that Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah his mother. Thus he took Rebekah as his wife; and he fell in love with her, and Isaac found comfort after the loss of his mother.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 25\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Abraham again took a wife, and her name was Keturah. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0In time she bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Jokshan became father to Sheba and Dedan.\
The sons of Dedan were Asshurim, Letushim, and Leummim.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah.\
All of these were the sons of Keturah.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Later on Abraham gave everything he had to Isaac, \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0but Abraham gave gifts to his sons by his concubines. Then while he was still alive, he sent them eastward, away from Isaac his son, to the land of the East. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0The years of Abraham\'92s life were 175 years. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, old and satisfied, and was gathered to his people. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite that is in front of Mamre, \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0the field that Abraham had purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried, with his wife Sarah. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0After Abraham\'92s death, God continued to bless his son Isaac, and Isaac was dwelling near Beer-lahai-roi.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Ishmael the son of Abraham whom Hagar the Egyptian, the servant of Sarah, bore to Abraham.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Now these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names according to their family origins: Ishmael\'92s firstborn Nebaioth, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Mishma, Dumah, Massa, \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names by their settlements and by their encampments, 12 chieftains according to their clans. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0And Ishmael lived for 137 years. Then he breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0And they took up dwelling from Havilah near Shur, which is close to Egypt, as far as Assyria. He settled near all his brothers.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And this is the history of Isaac the son of Abraham.\
Abraham became father to Isaac. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Isaac was 40 years old when he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramaean of Paddan-aram, the sister of Laban the Aramaean. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And Isaac kept pleading with Jehovah regarding his wife, because she was barren; so Jehovah responded to his plea, and his wife Rebekah became pregnant. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0And the sons within her began to struggle with each other, so that she said: \'93If this is the way it is, why should I go on living?\'94 So she inquired of Jehovah. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0And Jehovah said to her: \'93Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples will be separated from within you; and the one nation will be stronger than the other nation, and the older will serve the younger.\'94\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0When the time came for her to give birth, look! twins were in her womb. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Then the first came out red all over and was like a garment of hair, so they named him Esau. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0After that his brother came out and his hand was holding onto the heel of Esau, so he named him Jacob. Isaac was 60 years old when she gave birth to them.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0As the boys got bigger, Esau became a skilled hunter, a man of the field, but Jacob was a blameless man, dwelling in tents. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0And Isaac loved Esau because it meant game in his mouth, whereas Rebekah loved Jacob. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0On one occasion Jacob was boiling some stew when Esau returned from the field exhausted. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0So Esau said to Jacob: \'93Quick, please, give me some of the red stew that you have there, for I am exhausted!\'94 That is why his name was Edom. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0To this Jacob said: \'93First sell me your right as firstborn!\'94 \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0And Esau continued: \'93Here I am about to die! What use is a birthright to me?\'94 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0And Jacob added: \'93Swear to me first!\'94 So he swore to him and sold his right as firstborn to Jacob. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob gave Esau bread and lentil stew, and he ate and drank, and he got up and went away. Thus Esau despised the birthright.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 26\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now there was a famine in the land, in addition to the first famine that occurred in the days of Abraham, so that Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines, in Gerar. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Then Jehovah appeared to him and said: \'93Do not go down to Egypt. Dwell in the land that I designate to you. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Reside as a foreigner in this land, and I will continue with you and bless you because to you and to your offspring I will give all these lands, and I will carry out the oath that I swore to your father Abraham: \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0\'91I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens; and I will give to your offspring all these lands; and by means of your offspring, all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves,\'92 \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0on account of the fact that Abraham listened to my voice and continued to keep my requirements, my commands, my statutes, and my laws.\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So Isaac continued to dwell in Gerar.\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0When the men of the place kept asking about his wife, he would say: \'93She is my sister.\'94 He was afraid to say, \'93She is my wife,\'94 for he said, \'93The men of the place might kill me because of Rebekah,\'94 for she was beautiful in appearance. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0After some time had passed, Abimelech king of the Philistines was looking out of the window, and he saw Isaac displaying affection for Rebekah his wife. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0At once Abimelech called Isaac and said: \'93She is actually your wife! Why did you say, \'91She is my sister\'92?\'94 At this Isaac said to him: \'93I said it for fear I should die because of her.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0But Abimelech continued: \'93What have you done to us? One of the people could easily have lain down with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us!\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then Abimelech commanded all the people, saying: \'93Anybody touching this man and his wife will surely be put to death!\'94\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And Isaac began to sow seed in that land, and in that year he reaped 100 times what he sowed, for Jehovah was blessing him. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0The man became wealthy, and he continued to prosper until he became very wealthy. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0He acquired flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and a large body of servants, and the Philistines began to envy him.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0So the Philistines took soil and stopped up all the wells that his father\'92s servants had dug in the days of Abraham. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Abimelech then said to Isaac: \'93Move from our neighborhood, for you have grown far stronger than we are.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0So Isaac moved from there and encamped in the valley of Gerar and began dwelling there. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0And Isaac again dug the wells that had been dug in the days of his father Abraham but that the Philistines had stopped up after Abraham\'92s death, and he called them by the names that his father had given them.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0When the servants of Isaac were digging in the valley, they found a well of fresh water. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0And the shepherds of Gerar began quarreling with the shepherds of Isaac, saying: \'93The water is ours!\'94 So he named the well Esek, because they had quarreled with him. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And they started digging another well, and they began quarreling over it also. So he named it Sitnah. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Later he moved away from there and dug another well, but they did not quarrel over it. So he named it Rehoboth and said: \'93It is because now Jehovah has given us ample room and has made us fruitful in the land.\'94\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then he went up from there to Beer-sheba. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0That night Jehovah appeared to him and said: \'93I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you, and I will bless you and multiply your offspring on account of Abraham my servant.\'94 \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0So he built an altar there and called on the name of Jehovah. And Isaac pitched his tent there, and his servants dug a well there.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Later Abimelech came to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath his personal adviser and Phicol the chief of his army. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0At this Isaac said to them: \'93Why have you come to me, seeing that you hated me and sent me away from your neighborhood?\'94 \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0To this they said: \'93We have clearly seen that Jehovah has been with you. So we said, \'91Let there, please, be an oath of obligation between us and you, and let us make a covenant with you \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0that you will do nothing bad to us just as we have not harmed you, seeing that we have done only good to you in that we sent you away in peace. You now are the blessed of Jehovah.\'92\'94 \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Then he made a feast for them, and they ate and drank. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0In the morning they got up early and swore an oath to each other. After that Isaac sent them away, and they went from him in peace.\
\cf4 32\cf5 \'a0On that day the servants of Isaac came and reported to him about the well that they had dug, and they told him: \'93We have found water!\'94 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0So he named it Shibah. That is why the name of the city is Beer-sheba to this day.\
\cf4 34\cf5 \'a0When Esau was 40 years old, he took as wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite and also Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0They were a source of great grief to Isaac and Rebekah.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 27\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now when Isaac was old and his eyes were too weak to see, he called Esau his older son to him and said: \'93My son!\'94 He replied: \'93Here I am!\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0And he went on to say: \'93I have now grown old. I do not know the day of my death. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0So at this time take, please, your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt some wild game for me. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Then make the kind of tasty dish that I am fond of and bring it to me. Then I will eat it so that I may bless you before I die.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0However, Rebekah was listening while Isaac spoke to Esau his son. And Esau went out into the field to hunt game and to bring it in. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0And Rebekah said to Jacob her son: \'93I just heard your father speaking to your brother Esau, saying, \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0\'91Bring me some game and make me a tasty dish. Then let me eat so that I may bless you before Jehovah before my death.\'92 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0And now, my son, listen carefully and do what I am instructing you. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Go, please, to the herd and get me two of the best young goats from there so that I may prepare from them a tasty dish for your father, just the way he likes it. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Then take it to your father to eat, in order that he may bless you before his death.\'94\
\cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Jacob said to his mother Rebekah: \'93But Esau my brother is a hairy man, and my skin is smooth. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0What if my father feels me? Then I will certainly appear to be mocking him, and I will bring upon myself a curse rather than a blessing.\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0At this his mother said to him: \'93Upon me be the curse meant for you, my son. Just do as I say and go, get them for me.\'94 \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made a tasty dish, just the way his father liked it. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0After that Rebekah took her older son Esau\'92s finest garments, which she had in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0She also put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the hairless part of his neck. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Then she handed the tasty dish and the bread that she had made to her son Jacob.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0So he went in to his father and said: \'93My father!\'94 to which he said: \'93Here I am! Who are you, my son?\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Jacob said to his father: \'93I am Esau your firstborn. I have done just as you told me. Sit up, please, and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.\'94 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0At that Isaac said to his son: \'93How were you so quick in finding it, my son?\'94 He replied: \'93Because Jehovah your God brought it to me.\'94 \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Then Isaac said to Jacob: \'93Come near, please, that I may feel you, my son, to know whether you are really my son Esau or not.\'94 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0So Jacob came near to his father Isaac, and he felt him, after which he said: \'93The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau.\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0He did not recognize him because his hands were hairy like the hands of his brother Esau. So he blessed him.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0After that he asked: \'93Are you really my son Esau?\'94 to which he replied: \'93I am.\'94 \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Bring me some of the wild game for me to eat, my son, then I will bless you.\'94 With that he brought it to him and he ate, and he brought him wine and he drank. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then Isaac his father said to him: \'93Come near, please, and kiss me, my son.\'94 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0So he came near and kissed him, and he could smell the scent of his garments. Then he blessed him and said:\
\'93See, the scent of my son is like the scent of the field that Jehovah has blessed. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0May the true God give you the dews of the heavens and the fertile soils of the earth and an abundance of grain and new wine. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Let peoples serve you, and let nations bow low to you. Be master over your brothers, and let the sons of your mother bow low to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses you.\'94\
\cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Now Isaac had just finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had barely left the presence of his father Isaac when his brother Esau came back from his hunting. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0He too prepared a tasty dish and brought it to his father, and he said to his father: \'93Let my father get up and eat some of his son\'92s game, in order that you may bless me.\'94 \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0At this his father Isaac said to him: \'93Who are you?\'94 to which he said: \'93I am your son, your firstborn, Esau.\'94 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0And Isaac began to tremble violently, so he said: \'93Who was it, then, who hunted for game and brought it to me? I already ate it before you arrived, and I blessed him\'97and he will surely be blessed!\'94\
\cf4 34\cf5 \'a0On hearing his father\'92s words, Esau began to cry out in an extremely loud and bitter manner and to say to his father: \'93Bless me, yes, me too, my father!\'94 \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0But he said: \'93Your brother came deceitfully so that he might get the blessing meant for you.\'94 \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0At this he said: \'93Is he not rightly named Jacob, that he might supplant me these two times? My birthright he has already taken, and now he has taken my blessing!\'94 Then he added: \'93Have you not reserved a blessing for me?\'94 \cf4 37\cf5 \'a0But Isaac answered Esau: \'93Here I have appointed him master over you, and I have given him all his brothers as servants, and I have bestowed grain and new wine for his support. What is left that I can do for you, my son?\'94\
\cf4 38\cf5 \'a0Esau said to his father: \'93Is there just one blessing that you have, my father? Bless me, yes, me too, my father!\'94 With that Esau cried loudly and burst into tears. \cf4 39\cf5 \'a0So his father Isaac answered him:\
\'93See, away from the fertile soils of the earth your dwelling will be, and away from the dew of the heavens above. \cf4 40\cf5 \'a0And by your sword you will live, and you will serve your brother. But when you grow restless, you will indeed break his yoke off your neck.\'94\
\cf4 41\cf5 \'a0However, Esau harbored animosity against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him, and Esau kept saying in his heart: \'93The days of mourning for my father are getting closer. After that I am going to kill Jacob my brother.\'94 \cf4 42\cf5 \'a0When the words of her older son Esau were told to Rebekah, she at once sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him: \'93Look! Your brother Esau is planning to take revenge by killing you. \cf4 43\cf5 \'a0Now, my son, do as I say. Get up and run away to my brother Laban at Haran. \cf4 44\cf5 \'a0Dwell with him for a while until your brother\'92s rage calms down, \cf4 45\cf5 \'a0until your brother\'92s anger toward you subsides and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send for you from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?\'94\
\cf4 46\cf5 \'a0After that Rebekah kept saying to Isaac: \'93I am disgusted with my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob ever takes a wife from the daughters of Heth, like these daughters of the land, what good is my life?\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 28\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, saying: \'93You must not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Go away to Paddan-aram to the house of Bethuel, your mother\'92s father, and from there take for yourself a wife from the daughters of Laban, your mother\'92s brother. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0God Almighty will bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and you will certainly become a congregation of peoples. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0And he will give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may take possession of the land where you have been living as a foreigner, which God has given to Abraham.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0So Isaac sent Jacob away, and he departed for Paddan-aram, to Laban the son of Bethuel the Aramaean, the brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him away to Paddan-aram to take a wife from there and that when he blessed him, he commanded him, \'93Do not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan,\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and departed for Paddan-aram. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Esau then realized that the daughters of Canaan were displeasing to his father Isaac, \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0so Esau went to Ishmael and took as wife Mahalath the daughter of Abraham\'92s son Ishmael, the sister of Nebaioth, in addition to the other wives he already had.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Jacob departed from Beer-sheba and kept going toward Haran. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0In time he came to a place and prepared to spend the night there because the sun had set. So he took one of the stones of that place and set it to rest his head on and lay down there. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then he had a dream, and look! there was a stairway set on the earth, and its top reached up to the heavens; and there were God\'92s angels ascending and descending on it. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0And look! there was Jehovah stationed above it, and he said:\
\'93I am Jehovah the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac. The land on which you are lying, to you I am going to give it and to your offspring. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0And your offspring will certainly become like the dust particles of the earth, and you will spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and by means of you and by means of your offspring all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go, and I will return you to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.\'94\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said: \'93Truly Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0And he grew fearful and added: \'93How awe-inspiring this place is! This can only be the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens.\'94 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0So Jacob got up early in the morning and took the stone on which he had rested his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0So he named that place Bethel, but previously the city\'92s name was Luz.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Jacob then made a vow, saying: \'93If God will continue with me and will protect me on my journey and will give me bread to eat and garments to wear \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0and I return in peace to the house of my father, then Jehovah will certainly have proved to be my God. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0And this stone that I have set up as a pillar will become a house of God, and without fail I will give you a tenth of everything you give to me.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 29\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0After that Jacob resumed his journey and traveled on to the land of the people of the East. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Now he saw a well in the field and three droves of sheep lying down next to it, because they usually watered the droves from that well. There was a large stone over the mouth of the well. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0When all the droves had been gathered there, they rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, and they watered the flocks, after which they returned the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0So Jacob said to them: \'93My brothers, what place are you from?\'94 to which they said: \'93We are from Haran.\'94 \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0He said to them: \'93Do you know Laban the grandson of Nahor?\'94 to which they said: \'93We know him.\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0At this he said to them: \'93Is he well?\'94 They replied: \'93He is well. And here is his daughter Rachel coming with the sheep!\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93It is still the middle of the day. It is not the time for gathering the herds. Water the sheep, and then go feed them.\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0To this they said: \'93We are not allowed to do so until all the droves are gathered and they roll the stone away from the mouth of the well. Then we water the sheep.\'94\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father\'92s sheep, for she was a shepherdess. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0When Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban his mother\'92s brother, and the sheep of Laban, Jacob immediately approached and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of Laban his mother\'92s brother. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob kissed Rachel and raised his voice and burst into tears. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And Jacob began to tell Rachel that he was the relative of her father and that he was the son of Rebekah. And she ran off and told her father.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0As soon as Laban heard the report about Jacob the son of his sister, he ran to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him into his house. And he began to tell Laban all these things. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Laban said to him: \'93You are indeed my bone and my flesh.\'94 So he stayed with him a full month.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Laban then said to Jacob: \'93Just because you are my relative, should you serve me for nothing? Tell me, what are your wages to be?\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Now Laban had two daughters. The name of the older was Leah, and the name of the younger, Rachel. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0But the eyes of Leah had no luster, whereas Rachel had become a very attractive and beautiful woman. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, so he said: \'93I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0To this Laban said: \'93It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to another man. Keep dwelling with me.\'94 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, but in his eyes they were like just a few days because of his love for her.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob said to Laban: \'93Give over my wife because my days are up, and let me have relations with her.\'94 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0With that Laban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0But during the evening, he resorted to taking his daughter Leah and bringing her to him that he might have relations with her. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Laban also gave his female servant Zilpah to his daughter Leah as a servant. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0In the morning Jacob saw that it was Leah! So he said to Laban: \'93What have you done to me? Was it not for Rachel that I served you? Why have you tricked me?\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0To this Laban said: \'93It is not our custom here to give the younger woman before the firstborn. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Celebrate the week of this woman. After that you will also be given this other woman in exchange for serving me seven more years.\'94 \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Jacob did so and celebrated the week of this woman, after which he gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Besides, Laban gave his female servant Bilhah to his daughter Rachel as her servant.\
\cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob had relations also with Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leah, and he served him for another seven years. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0When Jehovah saw that Leah was unloved, he then enabled her to become pregnant, but Rachel was barren. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0So Leah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Reuben, for she said: \'93It is because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will begin to love me.\'94 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0And she again became pregnant and gave birth to a son and then said: \'93It is because Jehovah has listened, in that I was unloved, so he gave me this one also.\'94 Then she named him Simeon. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0And she became pregnant yet again and gave birth to a son and then said: \'93Now this time my husband will join himself to me, because I have borne him three sons.\'94 Therefore, he was named Levi. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0And she became pregnant once more and gave birth to a son and then said: \'93This time I will praise Jehovah.\'94 She therefore named him Judah. After that she stopped giving birth.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 30\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0When Rachel saw that she had borne no children to Jacob, she became jealous of her sister and began to say to Jacob: \'93Give me children or else I will die.\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0At this Jacob\'92s anger flared up against Rachel, and he said: \'93Am I in the place of God, who has prevented you from having children?\'94 \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0So she said: \'93Here is my slave girl Bilhah. Have relations with her in order that she may bear children for me and that through her, I too may have children.\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0With that she gave him her servant Bilhah as a wife, and Jacob had relations with her. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Bilhah became pregnant and in time bore Jacob a son. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Then Rachel said: \'93God has acted as my judge and has also listened to my voice, so that he gave me a son.\'94 That is why she named him Dan. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Bilhah, Rachel\'92s servant, became pregnant once more and in time bore Jacob a second son. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Then Rachel said: \'93With strenuous wrestlings I have wrestled with my sister. I have also come off the winner!\'94 So she named him Naphtali.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0When Leah saw that she had stopped having children, she took her servant Zilpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0And Leah\'92s servant Zilpah bore a son to Jacob. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then Leah said: \'93With good fortune!\'94 So she named him Gad. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0After that Zilpah, Leah\'92s servant, bore a second son to Jacob. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Then Leah said: \'93With my happiness! For the daughters will certainly pronounce me happy.\'94 So she named him Asher.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Now Reuben was walking in the days of the wheat harvest, and he found mandrakes in the field. So he brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah: \'93Give me, please, some of your son\'92s mandrakes.\'94 \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0At this she said to her: \'93Is it a small matter that you took my husband? Would you now take my son\'92s mandrakes also?\'94 So Rachel said: \'93Very well. He will lie down with you tonight in exchange for your son\'92s mandrakes.\'94\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0When Jacob was coming from the field in the evening, Leah went out to meet him and said: \'93It is with me you are going to have relations, because I have hired you outright with my son\'92s mandrakes.\'94 So he lay down with her that night. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0And God heard and answered Leah, and she became pregnant and in time bore to Jacob a fifth son. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Then Leah said: \'93God has given me my wages because I have given my servant to my husband.\'94 So she named him Issachar. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And Leah became pregnant once more and in time bore a sixth son to Jacob. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Then Leah said: \'93God has endowed me, yes, me, with a good endowment. At last, my husband will tolerate me, for I have borne him six sons.\'94 So she named him Zebulun. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Afterward she bore a daughter and named her Dinah.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Finally God remembered Rachel, and God heard and answered her by enabling her to become pregnant. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0And she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Then she said: \'93God has taken away my reproach!\'94 \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0So she named him Joseph, saying: \'93Jehovah is adding another son to me.\'94\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob immediately said to Laban: \'93Send me away so that I may go to my place and to my land. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Give over my wives and my children, for whom I have served with you, that I may go, for you well know how I have served you.\'94 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Then Laban said to him: \'93If I have found favor in your eyes,\'97I have understood by the omens that Jehovah is blessing me because of you.\'94 \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0And he added: \'93Stipulate your wages to me, and I will give them.\'94 \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0So Jacob said to him: \'93You know how I have served you and how your herd has fared with me; \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0you had little before my coming, but your herd has increased and multiplied, and Jehovah has blessed you since I arrived. So when will I do something for my own house?\'94\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93What should I give you?\'94 And Jacob said: \'93You will give me nothing whatsoever! If you will do this one thing for me, I will resume shepherding your flock and guarding it. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0I will pass through your whole flock today. You set aside from there every sheep speckled and with color patches and every dark-brown sheep among the young rams and any color-patched and speckled one among the she-goats. From now on, these must become my wages. \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0And my righteousness must speak for me on a future day when you come to look over my wages; every one that is not speckled and color-patched among the she-goats and dark brown among the young rams will be considered stolen if it is with me.\'94\
\cf4 34\cf5 \'a0To this Laban said: \'93That is fine! Let it be according to your word.\'94 \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0Then on that day, he set aside the he-goats striped and color-patched and all the she-goats speckled and color-patched, every one in which there was any white and every one dark brown among the young rams, and gave them into the care of his sons. \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0After that he set a distance of three days\'92 journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob was shepherding the flocks of Laban that remained over.\
\cf4 37\cf5 \'a0Jacob then took freshly cut staffs of the storax, almond, and plane trees, and he peeled white spots in them by exposing the white wood of the staffs. \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0Then he placed the staffs that he had peeled in front of the flock, in the gutters, in the drinking troughs, where the flocks would come to drink, that they might get into heat in front of them when they came to drink.\
\cf4 39\cf5 \'a0So the flocks would get into heat in front of the staffs, and the flocks would produce striped, speckled, and color-patched offspring. \cf4 40\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob separated the young rams and turned the flocks to face the striped ones and all the dark-brown ones among the flocks of Laban. Then he separated his own flocks and did not mix them with Laban\'92s flocks. \cf4 41\cf5 \'a0And whenever the robust animals would get into heat, Jacob would place the staffs in the gutters before the eyes of the flocks, that they might get into heat by the staffs. \cf4 42\cf5 \'a0But when the animals were weak, he would not place the staffs there. So the weak ones always came to be Laban\'92s, but the robust ones became Jacob\'92s.\
\cf4 43\cf5 \'a0And the man grew very prosperous, and he acquired great flocks and male and female servants and camels and donkeys.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 31\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0In time he heard what the sons of Laban were saying: \'93Jacob has taken everything that belonged to our father, and from what belonged to our father, he has amassed all this wealth.\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0When Jacob would look at the face of Laban, he saw that his attitude toward him was not what it used to be. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Finally Jehovah said to Jacob: \'93Return to the land of your fathers and to your relatives, and I will continue with you.\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob sent a message to Rachel and Leah to come out to the field to his flock, \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0and he said to them:\
\'93I have seen that your father\'92s attitude toward me has changed, but the God of my father has been with me. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0You yourselves certainly know that I have served your father with all my power. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0And your father has tried to cheat me and has changed my wages ten times; but God has not allowed him to do me harm. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0If on the one hand he would say, \'91The speckled ones will be your wages,\'92 then the whole flock produced speckled ones; but if on the other hand he would say, \'91The striped ones will be your wages,\'92 then the whole flock produced striped ones. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0So God kept taking your father\'92s livestock away from him and giving it to me. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Once when the flock got into heat, I raised my eyes and saw in a dream that the he-goats mating with the flock were striped, speckled, and spotty. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then the angel of the true God said to me in the dream, \'91Jacob!\'92 to which I said, \'91Here I am.\'92 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And he continued, \'91Raise your eyes, please, and see that all the he-goats mating with the flock are striped, speckled, and spotty, for I have seen all that Laban is doing to you. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0I am the true God of Bethel, where you anointed a pillar and where you made a vow to me. Now get up, go out of this land, and return to the land of your birth.\'92\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0At this Rachel and Leah answered him: \'93Is there any share left for us to inherit in our father\'92s house? \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Does he not consider us as foreigners, since he has sold us and has been using up the money given for us? \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0All the riches that God has taken away from our father are ours and our children\'92s. So, then, do everything that God has told you to do.\'94\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob got up and lifted his children and his wives on the camels, \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0and he began driving all his herd and all the goods that he had accumulated, the livestock in his possession that he had accumulated in Paddan-aram, to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Now Laban had gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole the teraphim statues that belonged to her father. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Moreover, Jacob outwitted Laban the Aramaean, for he had not told him that he was running away. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And he ran away and crossed the River, he and all he had. Then he headed toward the mountainous region of Gilead. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0On the third day, Laban was told that Jacob had run away. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So he took his brothers with him and pursued him for a journey of seven days and caught up with him in the mountainous region of Gilead. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Then God came to Laban the Aramaean in a dream by night and said to him: \'93Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.\'94\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0So Laban approached Jacob, as Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain and Laban had encamped with his brothers in the mountainous region of Gilead. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then Laban said to Jacob: \'93What have you done? Why have you resorted to outwitting me and carrying my daughters off like captives taken by the sword? \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Why did you run away secretly and outwit me and not tell me? If you had told me, I could have sent you away with rejoicing and with songs, with tambourine and with harp. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0But you did not give me a chance to kiss my grandchildren and my daughters. You have acted foolishly. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0It is in my power to do harm to you, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, \'91Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.\'92 \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Now you have gone because you have been longing to return to the house of your father, but why have you stolen my gods?\'94\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0Jacob answered Laban: \'93It was because I was afraid, for I said to myself, \'91You might take your daughters away from me by force.\'92 \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0Anyone with whom you find your gods will not live. Before our brothers, examine what I have, and take what is yours.\'94 But Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them. \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0So Laban went into the tent of Jacob and into the tent of Leah and into the tent of the two slave girls, but did not find them. Then he came out of Leah\'92s tent and went into Rachel\'92s tent. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0Meanwhile, Rachel had taken the teraphim statues and put them in the woman\'92s saddle basket of the camel, and she was sitting on them. So Laban searched through the whole tent but did not find them. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0Then she said to her father: \'93Do not be angry, my lord, because I am not able to get up before you, for the customary thing with women is upon me.\'94 So he searched on carefully but did not find the teraphim statues.\
\cf4 36\cf5 \'a0At that Jacob became angry and began to criticize Laban. Jacob then said to Laban: \'93What is my offense, and for what sin are you hotly pursuing me? \cf4 37\cf5 \'a0Now that you have searched through all my goods, what have you found that belongs to your house? Put it here in front of my brothers and your brothers, and let them decide between the two of us. \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0During these 20 years that I have been with you, your sheep and your goats never miscarried, and I never ate the rams of your flock. \cf4 39\cf5 \'a0I did not bring you any animal torn by wild beasts. I would stand the loss of it myself. Whether the animal was stolen by day or was stolen by night, you would demand compensation from me. \cf4 40\cf5 \'a0By day the heat consumed me, and the cold by night, and sleep would flee from my eyes. \cf4 41\cf5 \'a0This makes 20 years for me in your house. I have served you 14 years for your two daughters and 6 years for your flock, and you kept changing my wages ten times. \cf4 42\cf5 \'a0If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the One whom Isaac fears, had not been on my side, you would now have sent me away empty-handed. God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands, and that is why he reproved you last night.\'94\
\cf4 43\cf5 \'a0Then Laban answered Jacob: \'93The daughters are my daughters and the children my children and the flock my flock, and everything you are looking at is mine and my daughters\'92. What can I do today against these or against their children whom they have borne? \cf4 44\cf5 \'a0Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I, and it will serve as a witness between us.\'94 \cf4 45\cf5 \'a0So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar. \cf4 46\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob said to his brothers: \'93Pick up stones!\'94 And they took stones and made a pile. After that they ate there on the pile of stones. \cf4 47\cf5 \'a0And Laban began calling it Jegar-sahadutha, but Jacob called it Galeed.\
\cf4 48\cf5 \'a0Laban then said: \'93This pile of stones is a witness between me and you today.\'94 That is why he named it Galeed, \cf4 49\cf5 \'a0and the Watchtower, for he said: \'93Let Jehovah keep watch between you and me when we are out of each other\'92s sight. \cf4 50\cf5 \'a0If you mistreat my daughters and if you start taking wives in addition to my daughters, though there is no man with us, remember that God will be a witness between you and me.\'94 \cf4 51\cf5 \'a0Laban went on to say to Jacob: \'93Here is this pile of stones, and here is the pillar that I have erected between you and me. \cf4 52\cf5 \'a0This pile of stones is a witness, and the pillar is something that bears witness, that I will not pass beyond this pile of stones to bring harm to you and you will not pass beyond this pile of stones and this pillar to bring harm to me. \cf4 53\cf5 \'a0Let the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us.\'94 And Jacob swore by the One whom his father Isaac fears.\
\cf4 54\cf5 \'a0After that Jacob offered a sacrifice in the mountain and invited his brothers to eat bread. So they ate and spent the night in the mountain. \cf4 55\cf5 \'a0However, Laban got up early in the morning and kissed his grandchildren and his daughters and blessed them. Then Laban departed and returned home.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 32\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Jacob then went on his way, and the angels of God met up with him. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0As soon as he saw them, Jacob said: \'93This is the camp of God!\'94 So he named that place Mahanaim.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau in the land of Seir, the territory of Edom, \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0and he commanded them: \'93This is what you will say to my lord, to Esau, \'91This is what your servant Jacob says: \'93I have resided with Laban for a long time until now. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0And I have acquired bulls, donkeys, sheep, and male and female servants, and I send this message to inform my lord, in order to find favor in your eyes.\'94\'92\'94\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0In time the messengers returned to Jacob, saying: \'93We met your brother Esau, and he is now on his way to meet you, and there are 400 men with him.\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0And Jacob became very frightened and anxious. So he divided the people who were with him, as well as the flocks, the cattle, and the camels, into two camps. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0He said: \'93If Esau attacks the one camp, then the other camp will be able to escape.\'94\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0After that Jacob said: \'93O God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, you who are saying to me, \'91Return to your land and to your relatives, and I will deal well with you,\'92 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0I am unworthy of all the loyal love and of all the faithfulness that you have shown toward your servant, for with only my staff I crossed this Jordan and now I have become two camps. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Save me, I pray you, from the hand of my brother Esau, for I am afraid of him that he may come and attack me, as well as the mothers and their children. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And you have said: \'91I will certainly deal well with you, and I will make your offspring like the grains of sand of the sea, which are too numerous to count.\'92\'94\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0And he spent the night there. Then he took some of his possessions as a gift for Esau his brother: \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0200 female goats, 20 male goats, 200 female sheep, 20 rams, \cf4 15\cf5 \'a030 camels nursing their young, 40 cows, 10 bulls, 20 female donkeys and 10 full-grown male donkeys.\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0He handed them over to his servants, one drove after another, and he said to his servants: \'93Cross over ahead of me, and you are to set a space between one drove and the next.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0He also commanded the first one: \'93In case Esau my brother should meet you and ask, \'91To whom do you belong, and where are you going, and to whom do these ahead of you belong?\'92 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0then you should say, \'91To your servant Jacob. It is a gift sent to my lord, to Esau, and look! he himself is also behind us.\'92\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And he commanded also the second, the third, and all those following the droves: \'93According to this word, you are to speak to Esau when you meet him. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0And you should also say, \'91Here is your servant Jacob behind us.\'92\'94 For he said to himself: \'91If I appease him by sending a gift ahead of me, then afterward when I see him, he may give me a kindly reception.\'92 \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0So the gift crossed over ahead of him, but he himself spent the night in the camp.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Later during that night, he rose and took his two wives and his two female servants and his 11 young sons and crossed over the ford of Jabbok. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So he took them and brought them across the stream, and he brought over everything else he had.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Finally Jacob was left by himself. Then a man began to wrestle with him until the dawn broke. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0When he saw that he had not prevailed over him, he touched the socket of his hip; and the socket of Jacob\'92s hip was dislocated during his wrestling with him. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0After that he said: \'93Let me go, for the dawn is breaking.\'94 To this he said: \'93I am not going to let you go until you bless me.\'94 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0So he said to him: \'93What is your name?\'94 to which he said: \'93Jacob.\'94 \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Your name will no longer be Jacob but Israel, for you have contended with God and with men and you have at last prevailed.\'94 \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0In turn Jacob inquired: \'93Tell me, please, your name.\'94 However, he said: \'93Why is it that you ask my name?\'94 With that he blessed him there. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0So Jacob named the place Peniel, for he said, \'93I have seen God face-to-face, yet my life was preserved.\'94\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0And the sun rose upon him as soon as he passed by Penuel, but he was limping because of his hip. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0That is why to this day the sons of Israel are not accustomed to eat the thigh sinew, which is on the socket of the hip joint, because he touched the socket of Jacob\'92s hip joint by the thigh sinew.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 33\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Jacob raised his eyes and saw Esau coming, and 400 men were with him. So he divided the children among Leah, Rachel, and the two female servants. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0He put the female servants and their children in front, Leah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then he himself went ahead of them and bowed down to the earth seven times as he came near to his brother.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0But Esau ran to meet him, and he embraced him and kissed him, and they burst into tears. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0When he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children, he said: \'93Who are these with you?\'94 to which he said: \'93The children with whom God has favored your servant.\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0At that the female servants came forward with their children and bowed down, \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0and Leah too came forward with her children, and they bowed down. Then Joseph came forward with Rachel, and they bowed down.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Esau said: \'93What is the purpose of all this camp of travelers that I have met?\'94 He replied: \'93In order to find favor in the eyes of my lord.\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Then Esau said: \'93I have a great many possessions, my brother. Keep what is yours.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0However, Jacob said: \'93No, please. If I have found favor in your eyes, you must take my gift from my hand, because I brought it so that I could see your face. And I have seen your face as though seeing God\'92s face, in that you received me with pleasure. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Take, please, the gift conveying my blessing that was brought to you, for God has favored me and I have everything I need.\'94 And he continued to urge him, so that he took it.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Later Esau said: \'93Let us move out and go, and let me go in advance of you.\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0But he said to him: \'93My lord is aware that the children are delicate and that in my care are sheep and cattle nursing their young. If they are driven too quickly for one day, then the whole flock will die. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Let my lord, please, go on ahead of his servant, but I will continue the journey more slowly at the pace of my livestock and of the children until I come to my lord at Seir.\'94 \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Then Esau said: \'93Please, let me leave some of my people with you.\'94 To this he said: \'93Why do this? Just let me find favor in the eyes of my lord.\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0So that day Esau went on his way back to Seir.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and he built a house for himself and he made shelters for his herd. That was why he named the place Succoth.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0After journeying from Paddan-aram, Jacob arrived safely at the city of Shechem in the land of Canaan, and he set up his camp near the city. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Then he acquired a portion of the field where he pitched his tent from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for 100 pieces of money. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0There he set up an altar and called it God, the God of Israel.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 34\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Dinah, Jacob\'92s daughter by Leah, used to go out to spend time with the young women of the land. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0When Shechem, the son of Hamor the Hivite, a chieftain of the land, saw her, he took her and lay down with her and violated her. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0And he became very attached to Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he fell in love with the young woman and spoke persuasively to her. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Finally Shechem said to Hamor his father: \'93Get me this young woman to be my wife.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0When Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter, his sons were with his herd in the field. So Jacob kept silent until they returned. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Later Hamor, Shechem\'92s father, went out to speak with Jacob. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0But the sons of Jacob heard about it and returned from the field right away. They were offended and very angry because he had disgraced Israel by lying down with Jacob\'92s daughter, something that should not be done.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Hamor spoke with them, saying: \'93My son Shechem longs for your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife, \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0and form marriage alliances with us. Give us your daughters, and take our daughters for yourselves. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0You may dwell with us, and the land will become available for you. Dwell and carry on trade in it and settle in it.\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Then Shechem said to her father and to her brothers: \'93Let me find favor in your eyes, and I will give you whatever you ask me. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0You can demand from me a very high bride price and gift. I am willing to give whatever you may say to me. Just give me the young woman as a wife.\'94\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0And Jacob\'92s sons answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully because he had defiled Dinah their sister. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0They said to them: \'93We cannot possibly do such a thing, to give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for that is a disgrace to us. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0We can only consent on this condition: that you become like us and circumcise all your males. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and we will dwell with you and become one people. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0But if you do not listen to us and get circumcised, then we will take our daughter and go.\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Their words pleased Hamor and Shechem, Hamor\'92s son. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0The young man did not delay in doing what they asked, because he found delight in Jacob\'92s daughter, and he was the most honorable of the whole house of his father.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So Hamor and his son Shechem went to the city gate and spoke to the men of their city, saying: \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0\'93These men wish to be at peace with us. Let them dwell in the land and carry on trade in it, for the land is large enough to accommodate them. We can take their daughters as wives, and our daughters we can give to them. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Only on this one condition will the men consent to dwell with us in order to become one people: that every male among us be circumcised just the way they are circumcised. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then, will not their possessions, their wealth, and all their livestock be ours? So let us give them our consent that they may dwell with us.\'94 \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0All those going out by the gate of his city listened to Hamor and to his son Shechem, and all the males got circumcised, all those going out of the city gate.\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0However, on the third day, when they were still in pain, two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah\'92s brothers, each took his sword and went into the unsuspecting city and killed every male. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0They killed Hamor and his son Shechem with the sword and then took Dinah from Shechem\'92s house and left. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Jacob\'92s other sons came upon the slain men and plundered the city because they had defiled their sister. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in the field. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0They also took all their possessions, captured all their little children and their wives, and plundered everything in the houses.\
\cf4 30\cf5 \'a0At this Jacob said to Simeon and to Levi: \'93You have brought great trouble on me in making me a stench to the inhabitants of the land, to the Canaanites and the Perizzites. I am few in number, and they will certainly gather together to attack me and I will be annihilated, I and my house.\'94 \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0But they said: \'93Should anyone treat our sister like a prostitute?\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 35\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0After that God said to Jacob: \'93Rise, go up to Bethel and dwell there, and make an altar there to the true God, who appeared to you when you were running away from Esau your brother.\'94\
\cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob said to his household and to all who were with him: \'93Get rid of the foreign gods that are in your midst, and cleanse yourselves and change your garments, \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0and let us rise and go up to Bethel. There I will make an altar to the true God, who answered me in the day of my distress and who has been with me wherever I have gone.\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0So they gave Jacob all the foreign gods they had and the earrings that were in their ears, and Jacob buried them under the big tree that was close to Shechem.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0When they traveled on, the terror of God struck the cities around them, so they did not chase after the sons of Jacob. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Jacob eventually came to Luz, that is, Bethel, in the land of Canaan, he and all the people with him. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0There he built an altar and called the place El-bethel, because there the true God had revealed himself to him when he had run away from his brother. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Later Deborah, Rebekah\'92s nurse, died and was buried at the foot of Bethel under an oak. So he named it Allon-bacuth.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0God appeared to Jacob once again while he was coming from Paddan-aram and blessed him. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0God said to him: \'93Your name is Jacob. Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel will be your name.\'94 And he began to call him Israel. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0God further said to him: \'93I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and become many. Nations and a congregation of nations will come from you, and kings will descend from you. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0As for the land that I have given to Abraham and to Isaac, to you I will give it, and to your offspring after you I will give the land.\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Then God went up from him at the place where he had spoken with him.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had spoken with him, a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering on it and poured oil on it. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And Jacob continued to call the place where God had spoken with him Bethel.\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Then they pulled away from Bethel. And while they were still some distance from Ephrath, Rachel began to give birth, and her labor was very difficult. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0But while she was struggling to deliver the child, the midwife said to her: \'93Do not be afraid, for you will have this son also.\'94 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Just as her life was slipping away (for she was dying), she named him Ben-oni, but his father called him Benjamin. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath, that is, Bethlehem. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Jacob set up a pillar over her grave; it is the pillar of Rachel\'92s grave to this day.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0After that Israel pulled away and pitched his tent a distance beyond the tower of Eder. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Once while Israel was dwelling in that land, Reuben went and lay down with Bilhah his father\'92s concubine, and Israel heard about it.\
So there were 12 sons of Jacob. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0The sons by Leah were Jacob\'92s firstborn Reuben, then Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0The sons by Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0And the sons by Bilhah, Rachel\'92s servant, were Dan and Naphtali. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0And the sons by Zilpah, Leah\'92s servant, were Gad and Asher. These are Jacob\'92s sons, who were born to him in Paddan-aram.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Jacob eventually came to where his father Isaac was at Mamre, to Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron, where Abraham and also Isaac had resided as foreigners. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Isaac lived to be 180 years old. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Then Isaac breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people, after a long and satisfying life; and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 36\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Esau, that is, Edom.\
\cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Esau took his wives from the daughters of Canaan: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite; and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the granddaughter of Zibeon the Hivite; \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0and Basemath, Ishmael\'92s daughter, the sister of Nebaioth.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0And Adah bore Eliphaz to Esau, and Basemath bore Reuel,\cf4  5\cf5 \'a0and Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.\
These are the sons of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0After that Esau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the members of his household, his herd and all his other beasts, and all the wealth he had accumulated in the land of Canaan and he went to another land some distance away from Jacob his brother. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0For their goods had become too many for them to dwell together, and the land where they were residing was not able to sustain them because of their herds. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0So Esau took up dwelling in the mountainous region of Seir. Esau is Edom.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0And this is the history of Esau the father of Edom in the mountainous region of Seir.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0These are the names of the sons of Esau: Eliphaz the son of Adah, Esau\'92s wife; Reuel the son of Basemath, Esau\'92s wife.\
\cf4 11\cf5 \'a0The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Timna became the concubine of Eliphaz, Esau\'92s son. In time she bore to Eliphaz, Amalek. These are the sons of Adah, Esau\'92s wife.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. These were the sons of Basemath, Esau\'92s wife.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0These were the sons of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the granddaughter of Zibeon, Esau\'92s wife, whom she bore to Esau: Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0These are the sheikhs of the sons of Esau: The sons of Eliphaz, Esau\'92s firstborn: Sheikh Teman, Sheikh Omar, Sheikh Zepho, Sheikh Kenaz, \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Sheikh Korah, Sheikh Gatam, and Sheikh Amalek. These are the sheikhs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons by Adah.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Reuel, Esau\'92s son: Sheikh Nahath, Sheikh Zerah, Sheikh Shammah, and Sheikh Mizzah. These are the sheikhs of Reuel in the land of Edom. These are the sons by Basemath, Esau\'92s wife.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Finally these are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau\'92s wife: Sheikh Jeush, Sheikh Jalam, and Sheikh Korah. These are the sheikhs of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau\'92s wife.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Esau, and these are their sheikhs. He is Edom.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. These are the sheikhs of the Horites, the sons of Seir, in the land of Edom.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0The sons of Lotan were Hori and Hemam, and Lotan\'92s sister was Timna.\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. This is the Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness while he was tending the donkeys for Zibeon his father.\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0These are the children of Anah: Dishon and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan.\
\cf4 28\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0These are the sheikhs of the Horites: Sheikh Lotan, Sheikh Shobal, Sheikh Zibeon, Sheikh Anah, \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Sheikh Dishon, Sheikh Ezer, and Sheikh Dishan. These are the sheikhs of the Horites according to their sheikhs in the land of Seir.\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the Israelites. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0Bela son of Beor reigned in Edom, and the name of his city was Dinhabah. \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah began to reign in his place. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites began to reign in his place. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad, who defeated the Midianites in the territory of Moab, began to reign in his place, and the name of his city was Avith. \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah began to reign in his place. \cf4 37\cf5 \'a0When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth by the River began to reign in his place. \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0When Shaul died, Baal-hanan the son of Achbor began to reign in his place. \cf4 39\cf5 \'a0When Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, Hadar began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Pau, and the name of his wife was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred the daughter of Mezahab.\
\cf4 40\cf5 \'a0So these are the names of the sheikhs of Esau according to their families, according to their places, by their names: Sheikh Timna, Sheikh Alvah, Sheikh Jetheth, \cf4 41\cf5 \'a0Sheikh Oholibamah, Sheikh Elah, Sheikh Pinon, \cf4 42\cf5 \'a0Sheikh Kenaz, Sheikh Teman, Sheikh Mibzar, \cf4 43\cf5 \'a0Sheikh Magdiel, and Sheikh Iram. These are the sheikhs of Edom according to their settlements in the land of their possession. This is Esau the father of Edom.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 37\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Jacob continued to dwell in the land of Canaan, where his father had lived as a foreigner.\
\cf4 2\cf5 \'a0This is the history of Jacob.\
When Joseph was 17 years old, the young man was tending the flock with the sons of Bilhah and the sons of Zilpah, the wives of his father. And Joseph brought a bad report about them to their father. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his other sons because he was the son of his old age, and he had a special robe made for him. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0When his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they began to hate him, and they could not speak peaceably to him.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Later Joseph had a dream and told it to his brothers, and they found further reason to hate him. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0He said to them: \'93Please listen to this dream that I had. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0There we were binding sheaves in the middle of the field when my sheaf got up and stood erect and your sheaves encircled and bowed down to my sheaf.\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0His brothers said to him: \'93Are you really going to make yourself king over us and dominate us?\'94 So they found another reason to hate him, because of his dreams and what he said.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0After that he had still another dream, and he related it to his brothers: \'93I have had another dream. This time the sun and the moon and 11 stars were bowing down to me.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Then he related it to his father as well as his brothers, and his father rebuked him and said to him: \'93What is the meaning of this dream of yours? Am I as well as your mother and your brothers really going to come and bow down to the earth to you?\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0And his brothers grew jealous of him, but his father kept the saying in mind.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0His brothers now went to pasture their father\'92s flock near Shechem. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Israel later said to Joseph: \'93Your brothers are tending flocks near Shechem, are they not? Come, and let me send you to them.\'94 At this he said to him: \'93I am ready!\'94 \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So he said to him: \'93Go, please, and see whether your brothers are well. See how the flock is, and bring word back to me.\'94 With that he sent him away from the valley of Hebron, and he went on toward Shechem. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Later a man found him as he was wandering in a field. The man asked him: \'93What are you looking for?\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0To this he said: \'93I am looking for my brothers. Please tell me, where are they tending flocks?\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0The man continued: \'93They have pulled away from here, for I heard them saying, \'91Let us go to Dothan.\'92\'94 So Joseph went after his brothers and found them at Dothan.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Now they caught sight of him from a distance, and before he reached them, they began plotting against him to put him to death. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0So they said to one another: \'93Look! Here comes that dreamer. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Come, now, let us kill him and pitch him into one of the waterpits, and we will say that a vicious wild animal devoured him. Then let us see what will become of his dreams.\'94 \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0When Reuben heard this, he tried to rescue him from them. So he said: \'93Let us not take his life.\'94 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Reuben said to them: \'93Do not shed blood. Throw him into this waterpit in the wilderness, but do not harm him.\'94 His purpose was to rescue him from them in order to return him to his father.\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So as soon as Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped Joseph of his robe, the special robe that he wore, \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0and they took him and threw him into the waterpit. At the time the pit was empty; there was no water in it.\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Then they sat down to eat. When they looked up, there was a caravan of Ishmaelites coming from Gilead. Their camels were carrying labdanum gum, balsam, and resinous bark, and they were on their way down to Egypt. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0At this Judah said to his brothers: \'93What profit would there be if we killed our brother and covered over his blood? \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Come, now, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and do not let our hand be upon him. After all, he is our brother, our flesh.\'94 So they listened to their brother. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0And when the Midianite merchants were passing by, they lifted Joseph up out of the waterpit and sold him to the Ishmaelites for 20 pieces of silver. These men took Joseph into Egypt.\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Later when Reuben returned to the waterpit and saw that Joseph was not in the waterpit, he ripped his garments apart. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0When he returned to his brothers, he exclaimed: \'93The child is gone! And I\'97what am I going to do?\'94\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0So they took Joseph\'92s robe and slaughtered a male goat and dipped the robe in the blood. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0After that they sent the special robe to their father and said: \'93This is what we found. Please examine whether this is your son\'92s robe or not.\'94 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0Then he examined it and exclaimed: \'93It is my son\'92s robe! A vicious wild animal must have devoured him! Joseph is surely torn to pieces!\'94 \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0With that Jacob ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth around his waist and mourned his son for many days. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0And all his sons and all his daughters kept trying to comfort him, but he kept refusing to take comfort, saying: \'93I will go down into the Grave mourning my son!\'94 And his father continued weeping for him.\
\cf4 36\cf5 \'a0Now the Midianites sold him in Egypt to Potiphar, a court official of Pharaoh and the chief of the guard.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 38\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0About that time Judah left his brothers and pitched his tent near an Adullamite man named Hirah. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Canaanite named Shua. So he took her and had relations with her, \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0and she became pregnant. Later she bore a son, and he named him Er. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Again she became pregnant and bore a son and named him Onan. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Yet again she bore a son and named him Shelah. He was in Achzib when she bore him.\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0In time Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, and her name was Tamar. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0But Er, Judah\'92s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah; so Jehovah put him to death. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0In view of that, Judah said to Onan: \'93Have relations with your brother\'92s wife and perform brother-in-law marriage with her and raise up offspring for your brother.\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0But Onan knew that the offspring would not be considered his. So when he did have relations with his brother\'92s wife, he wasted his semen on the ground so as not to give offspring to his brother. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0What he did was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so he also put him to death. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law: \'93Dwell as a widow in the house of your father until my son Shelah grows up,\'94 for he said to himself: \'91He too may die like his brothers.\'92 So Tamar went and stayed in her own father\'92s house.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Some time passed, and Judah\'92s wife, the daughter of Shua, died. Judah kept the mourning period, and then he went to his sheepshearers in Timnah with his companion Hirah the Adullamite. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Tamar was told: \'93Here your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.\'94 \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0With that she removed her widow\'92s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of Enaim, which is on the road to Timnah, for she saw that Shelah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0So he turned aside to her by the road and said: \'93Allow me, please, to have relations with you,\'94 for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. However, she said: \'93What will you give me that you may have relations with me?\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0To this he said: \'93I will send a young goat from my herd.\'94 But she said: \'93Will you give a security until you send it?\'94 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0He continued: \'93What security should I give you?\'94 to which she said: \'93Your seal ring and your cord and your rod that is in your hand.\'94 Then he gave them to her and had relations with her, and she became pregnant by him. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0After that she got up and went away and removed her shawl and clothed herself with her widow\'92s clothing.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0And Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his companion the Adullamite, to get back the security from the hand of the woman, but he never found her. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0He inquired of the men of her place, saying: \'93Where is that temple prostitute in Enaim along the road?\'94 But they said: \'93No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.\'94 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Finally he returned to Judah and said: \'93I never found her, and besides, the men of the place said, \'91No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.\'92\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0So Judah said: \'93Let her take them for herself, in order that we may not fall into contempt. At any rate, I have sent this young goat, but you never found her.\'94\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0However, about three months later, Judah was told: \'93Tamar your daughter-in-law has acted as a prostitute, and she is also pregnant by her prostitution.\'94 At that Judah said: \'93Bring her out and let her be burned.\'94 \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0As she was being brought out, she sent word to her father-in-law: \'93I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.\'94 Then she added: \'93Please examine to whom these belong, the seal ring and the cord and the rod.\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then Judah examined them and said: \'93She is more righteous than I am, because I did not give her to Shelah my son.\'94 And he had no further sexual relations with her after that.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0When the time came for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0As she was giving birth, one put out his hand, and the midwife immediately took a scarlet thread and tied it around his hand, saying: \'93This one came out first.\'94 \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0But as soon as he drew back his hand, his brother came out, and she exclaimed: \'93What a breach you have made for yourself!\'94 So he was named Perez. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Afterward his brother came out, around whose hand the scarlet thread was tied, and he was named Zerah.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 39\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and an Egyptian named Potiphar, a court official of Pharaoh and chief of the guard, bought him from the Ishmaelites who had taken him down there. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0But Jehovah was with Joseph. As a result, he became successful and was put over the house of his master, the Egyptian. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0And his master saw that Jehovah was with him and that Jehovah was making everything that he did successful.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Joseph kept finding favor in his eyes, and he became his personal attendant. So he appointed him over his house, and he put him in charge of all that was his. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0From the time he appointed him over his house and in charge of all that was his, Jehovah kept blessing the house of the Egyptian because of Joseph, and Jehovah\'92s blessing came to be on all that he had in the house and in the field. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0He eventually left everything that was his in Joseph\'92s care, and he gave no thought to anything except the food he was eating. Moreover, Joseph grew to be well-built and handsome.\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Now after these things, the wife of his master began to cast her eyes on Joseph and say: \'93Lie down with me.\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0But he refused and said to his master\'92s wife: \'93Here my master does not know what is with me in the house, and he has entrusted everything he has into my care. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?\'94\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So day after day she spoke to Joseph, but he never consented to lie with her or to remain with her. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0But on one of the days when he went into the house to do his work, none of the household servants were in the house. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: \'93Lie down with me!\'94 But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0As soon as she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled outside, \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0she began to cry out to the men of her house and to say to them: \'93Look! He brought to us this Hebrew man to make us a laughingstock. He came to me to lie down with me, but I began to cry out at the top of my voice. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Then as soon as he heard me raising my voice and screaming, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0After that she laid his garment beside her until his master came to his house.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Then she told him the same thing, saying: \'93The Hebrew servant whom you brought to us came to me to make me a laughingstock. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0But as soon as I raised my voice and began to scream, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0As soon as his master heard the words his wife spoke to him, saying: \'93These are the things your servant did to me,\'94 his anger blazed. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So Joseph\'92s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest, and he remained there in the prison.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0But Jehovah continued with Joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0So the chief officer of the prison put Joseph in charge of all the prisoners in the prison, and everything that they were doing there, he was the one having it done. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0The chief officer of the prison was looking after absolutely nothing that was in Joseph\'92s care, for Jehovah was with Joseph and Jehovah made whatever he did successful.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 40\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0After these things, the chief cupbearer of the king of Egypt and the chief baker sinned against their lord, the king of Egypt. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0So Pharaoh grew indignant at his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker, \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0and he committed them to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, to the place where Joseph was a prisoner. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Then the chief of the guard assigned Joseph to be with them and to take care of them, and they remained in jail for some time.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0The cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, each had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own interpretation. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0The next morning, when Joseph came in and saw them, they looked dejected. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0So he asked the officers of Pharaoh who were in custody with him in his master\'92s house: \'93Why are your faces gloomy today?\'94 \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0At this they said to him: \'93We each had a dream, but there is no interpreter with us.\'94 Joseph said to them: \'93Do not interpretations belong to God? Relate it to me, please.\'94\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0So the chief cupbearer related his dream to Joseph, saying to him: \'93In my dream, there was a vine before me. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0And on the vine, there were three twigs, and as it was sprouting shoots, it blossomed, and its clusters ripened into grapes. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0And Pharaoh\'92s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and squeezed them out into Pharaoh\'92s cup. After that I put the cup in Pharaoh\'92s hand.\'94 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph said to him: \'93This is its interpretation: The three twigs are three days. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Three days from now, Pharaoh will bring you out, restoring you to your office, and you will put Pharaoh\'92s cup into his hand as you did before when you were his cupbearer. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Nevertheless, you must remember me when things go well with you. Please show me loyal love and mention me to Pharaoh, in order to get me out of this place. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0I was, in fact, kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.\'94\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0When the chief baker saw that Joseph had interpreted something good, he said to him: \'93I too was in my dream, and there were three baskets of white bread on my head, \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0and in the top basket, there were all sorts of baked goods for Pharaoh, and there were birds eating them out of the basket on top of my head.\'94 \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph answered, \'93This is its interpretation: The three baskets are three days. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Three days from now, Pharaoh will behead you and will hang you on a stake, and the birds will eat your flesh from you.\'94\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Now the third day was Pharaoh\'92s birthday, and he made a feast for all his servants, and he brought out both the chief cupbearer and the chief baker in the presence of his servants. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And he returned the chief cupbearer to his post of cupbearer, and he continued to hand the cup to Pharaoh. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0But he hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted to them. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0However, the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph; he kept forgetting him.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 41\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0At the end of two full years, Pharaoh dreamed that he was standing by the Nile River. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0And there, coming up from the river, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they were feeding on the Nile grass. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0There were seven other cows that looked ugly and thin coming up after them from the Nile, and they stood alongside the fat cows by the bank of the Nile. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Then the ugly, thin cows began to eat up the seven fine-looking, fat cows. At this Pharaoh woke up.\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Then he went back to sleep and had a second dream. There were seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0And growing up after them were seven ears of grain that were thin and scorched by the east wind. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0And the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven full and choice ears of grain. At this Pharaoh woke up and realized that it was a dream.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0But in the morning, his spirit became agitated. So he sent for all the magic-practicing priests of Egypt and all her wise men. Pharaoh related his dreams to them, but there was no one who could interpret them for Pharaoh.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0At that the chief cupbearer spoke with Pharaoh, saying: \'93I am confessing my sins today. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh was indignant at his servants. So he committed me to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, both me and the chief baker. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0After that we each had a dream on the same night. He and I each had a dream with its own interpretation. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And there with us was a young Hebrew man, a servant of the chief of the guard. When we related them to him, he interpreted for us the meaning of each dream. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0It happened exactly as he had interpreted to us. I was restored to my office, but the other man was hanged.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0So Pharaoh sent for Joseph, and they brought him quickly from the prison. He shaved and changed his clothes and went in to Pharaoh. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Then Pharaoh said to Joseph: \'93I had a dream, but there is no one to interpret it. Now I have heard it said about you that you can hear a dream and interpret it.\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0At this Joseph answered Pharaoh: \'93I need not be considered! God will speak concerning Pharaoh\'92s welfare.\'94\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh went on to say to Joseph: \'93In my dream I was standing on the bank of the Nile River. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0And there, coming up from the Nile, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they began to feed on the Nile grass. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And there were seven other cows coming up after them, poor and very bad-looking and thin. I have never seen such bad-looking cows in all the land of Egypt. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0And the skinny, bad cows began to eat up the first seven fat cows. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0But when they had consumed them, no one could have known that they had done so, since their appearance was just as bad as at the start. At that I woke up.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0\'93After that I saw in my dream seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Growing up after them were seven ears of shriveled grain, thin and scorched by the east wind. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Then the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven choice ears of grain. So I told it to the magic-practicing priests, but there was no one who could explain it to me.\'94\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph said to Pharaoh: \'93The dreams of Pharaoh are one and the same. The true God has told to Pharaoh what He will do. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0The seven good cows are seven years. Likewise, the seven good ears of grain are seven years. The dreams are one and the same. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0The seven skinny and bad cows that came up after them are seven years, and the seven empty ears of grain, scorched by the east wind, will prove to be seven years of famine. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0This is just as I told to Pharaoh: The true God has caused Pharaoh to see what He will do.\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0\'93There are to be seven years of great abundance in all the land of Egypt. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0But seven years of famine will certainly arise after them, and all the abundance in the land of Egypt will certainly be forgotten, and the famine will exhaust the land. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0And the previous abundance in the land will not be remembered because of the famine afterward, for it will be very severe. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0The dream was given twice to Pharaoh because the matter has been firmly established by the true God, and the true God will soon carry it out.\
\cf4 33\cf5 \'a0\'93So now let Pharaoh look for a man who is discreet and wise and place him over the land of Egypt. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0Let Pharaoh take action and appoint overseers in the land, and he should collect one fifth of the produce of Egypt during the seven years of abundance. \cf4 35\cf5 \'a0And let them collect all the food during these coming good years, and let them stockpile grain under Pharaoh\'92s authority as food to be stored in the cities and safeguarded there. \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0The food should serve as a supply for the land for the seven years of famine that will occur in the land of Egypt, so that the land may not perish in the famine.\'94\
\cf4 37\cf5 \'a0This proposal seemed good to Pharaoh and all his servants. \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0So Pharaoh said to his servants: \'93Can another man be found like this one in whom there is the spirit of God?\'94 \cf4 39\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh then said to Joseph: \'93Since God has caused you to know all of this, there is no one as discreet and wise as you. \cf4 40\cf5 \'a0You will personally be over my house, and all my people will obey you implicitly. Only in my role as king will I be greater than you.\'94 \cf4 41\cf5 \'a0And Pharaoh added to Joseph: \'93See, I am putting you over all the land of Egypt.\'94 \cf4 42\cf5 \'a0Then Pharaoh removed his signet ring from his own hand and put it on Joseph\'92s hand and clothed him with garments of fine linen and placed a necklace of gold around his neck. \cf4 43\cf5 \'a0Moreover, he had him ride in the second chariot of honor that he had, and they would call out ahead of him, 
\f3\i \'93Avr\'e9kh!\'94
\f2\i0  Thus he put him over all the land of Egypt.\
\cf4 44\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh further said to Joseph: \'93I am Pharaoh, but without your authorization, no man may do a single thing in all the land of Egypt.\'94 \cf4 45\cf5 \'a0After that Pharaoh gave Joseph the name Zaphenath-paneah and gave him Asenath the daughter of Potiphera the priest of On as a wife. And Joseph began to oversee the land of Egypt. \cf4 46\cf5 \'a0Joseph was 30 years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt.\
Then Joseph went out from before Pharaoh and traveled throughout all the land of Egypt. \cf4 47\cf5 \'a0And during the seven years of abundance, the land went on producing plentifully. \cf4 48\cf5 \'a0And he kept collecting all the food of the seven years from the land of Egypt, and he would stockpile the food in the cities. In each city he would store the food from the fields around it. \cf4 49\cf5 \'a0Joseph continued stockpiling grain in very great quantity, like the sand of the sea, until finally they gave up measuring it because it could not be measured.\
\cf4 50\cf5 \'a0Before the year of the famine arrived, two sons were born to Joseph, whom Asenath the daughter of Potiphera the priest of On bore to him. \cf4 51\cf5 \'a0Joseph named the firstborn Manasseh, for he said, \'93God has made me forget all my trouble and all the house of my father.\'94 \cf4 52\cf5 \'a0And he named the second one Ephraim, for he said, \'93God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.\'94\
\cf4 53\cf5 \'a0Then the seven years of abundance in the land of Egypt ended, \cf4 54\cf5 \'a0and the seven years of famine began, just as Joseph had said. The famine developed in all the lands, but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. \cf4 55\cf5 \'a0Eventually, all the land of Egypt suffered from the famine, and the people began to cry to Pharaoh for bread. Then Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians: \'93Go to Joseph, and do whatever he tells you.\'94 \cf4 56\cf5 \'a0The famine continued over all the surface of the earth. Then Joseph began to open up all the granaries that were among them and to sell to the Egyptians, as the famine had a strong grip on the land of Egypt. \cf4 57\cf5 \'a0Moreover, people of all the earth came to Egypt to buy from Joseph, because the famine had a strong grip on all the earth.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 42\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons: \'93Why do you just keep looking at one another?\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0He added: \'93I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us, so that we may stay alive and not die.\'94 \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0So ten of Joseph\'92s brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph\'92s brother, with his other brothers, for he said: \'93Perhaps a fatal accident may befall him.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0So Israel\'92s sons came along with the others who were coming to buy, because the famine had extended to the land of Canaan. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Joseph was the man in authority over the land, and he was the one who sold grain to all the people of the earth. So Joseph\'92s brothers came and bowed low to him with their faces to the ground. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0When Joseph saw his brothers, he immediately recognized them, but he concealed his identity from them. So he spoke harshly with them and said: \'93Where have you come from?\'94 to which they said: \'93From the land of Canaan to buy food.\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Thus Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Joseph immediately remembered the dreams that he had dreamed about them, and he said to them: \'93You are spies! You have come to see the vulnerable areas of the land!\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Then they said to him: \'93No, my lord, but your servants have come to buy food. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0We are all sons of but one man. We are upright men. Your servants do not act as spies.\'94 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0But he said to them: \'93Not so! You have come to see the vulnerable areas of the land!\'94 \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0At this they said: \'93Your servants are 12 brothers. We are the sons of but one man in the land of Canaan, and the youngest is now with our father, whereas the other one is no more.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0However, Joseph said to them: \'93It is just as I said to you\'97\'91You are spies!\'92 \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0By this you will be tested: As surely as Pharaoh lives, you will not leave this place until your youngest brother comes here. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Send one of you to bring your brother while you remain in bondage. In this way, your words may be tested out to see if you are telling the truth. And if not, then, as surely as Pharaoh lives, you are spies.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0With that he put them together in custody for three days.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Joseph said to them on the third day: \'93Do this and live, for I fear God. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0If you are upright, let one of your brothers remain in bondage in your house of custody, but the rest of you may go and take grain to alleviate the famine in your households. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Then bring your youngest brother to me, so that your words will be found trustworthy and you will not die.\'94 And they did so.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And they said to one another: \'93We are surely being punished on account of our brother, because we saw his distress when he begged us to show compassion, but we did not listen. That is why this distress has come upon us.\'94 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Then Reuben answered them: \'93Did I not say to you, \'91Do not sin against the child,\'92 but you would not listen? Now his blood is certainly being asked back.\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0But they did not know that Joseph understood, for there was an interpreter between them. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0So he turned away from them and began to weep. When he returned and spoke to them again, he took Simeon from them and bound him before their eyes. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Joseph then gave the command to fill up their bags with grain and to return each man\'92s money to his own sack and to give them provisions for the journey. This was done for them.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0So they loaded their grain on their donkeys and left from there. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0When one of them opened his sack to give fodder to his donkey at the lodging place, he saw his money there in the mouth of his bag. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0At that he said to his brothers: \'93My money has been returned, and now here it is in my bag!\'94 Then their hearts sank, and trembling, they turned to one another and said: \'93What is this that God has done to us?\'94\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0When they came to Jacob their father in the land of Canaan, they told him all the things that had befallen them, saying: \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0\'93The man who is the lord of the country spoke harshly with us and accused us of spying on the country. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0But we said to him, \'91We are upright men. We are not spies. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0We are 12 brothers, the sons of our father. One is no more, and the youngest is now with our father in the land of Canaan.\'92 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0But the man who is the lord of the country said to us, \'91By this I will know that you are upright: Leave one of your brothers with me. Then take something to alleviate the famine in your households and go. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0And bring your youngest brother to me, so that I may know that you are not spies but upright men. I will then give your brother back to you, and you may carry on trade in the land.\'92\'94\
\cf4 35\cf5 \'a0As they were emptying their sacks, here was each one\'92s bag of money in his sack. When they and their father saw their bags of money, they became afraid. \cf4 36\cf5 \'a0Jacob their father exclaimed to them: \'93It is I you have bereaved! Joseph is no more, and Simeon is no more, and you are going to take Benjamin! It is upon me that all these things have come!\'94 \cf4 37\cf5 \'a0But Reuben said to his father: \'93You may put to death my own two sons if I do not bring him back to you. Give him over to my care, and I will return him to you.\'94 \cf4 38\cf5 \'a0However, he said: \'93My son will not go down with you, because his brother is dead and he alone is left. If a fatal accident should befall him on the journey you would make, then you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave in grief.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 43\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Now the famine was severe in the land. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0So when they had finished eating the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them: \'93Return and buy a little food for us.\'94 \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Then Judah said to him: \'93The man clearly warned us, \'91You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.\'92 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0If you send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for you. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0But if you do not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us, \'91You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.\'92\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0And Israel asked: \'93Why did you have to bring this trouble on me by telling the man that you had another brother?\'94 \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0They replied: \'93The man directly inquired concerning us and our relatives, saying, \'91Is your father still alive? Do you have another brother?\'92 and we told him these facts. How could we possibly know that he would say, \'91Bring your brother down\'92?\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Judah then urged Israel his father: \'93Send the boy with me, and let us go on our way so that we may live and not die\'97we and you and our children. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0I will be a guarantee for his safety. You may hold me responsible. If I fail to return him to you and present him to you, I will have sinned against you for all time. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0But if we had not delayed, we could have been there and back twice by now.\'94\
\cf4 11\cf5 \'a0So Israel their father said to them: \'93If it must be so, then do this: Take the finest products of the land in your bags and carry them down to the man as a gift: a little balsam, a little honey, labdanum, resinous bark, pistachio nuts, and almonds. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Take double the money with you; and also take back the money that was returned in the mouth of your bags. Maybe it was a mistake. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Take your brother and go, return to the man. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0May God Almighty grant you pity from the man, so that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. But as for me, if I must be bereaved, I will be bereaved!\'94\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0So the men took this gift, and they took double the money in their hand and Benjamin. Then they rose and went on their way down to Egypt and again stood before Joseph. \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he at once said to the man who was over his house: \'93Take the men to the house and slaughter animals and prepare the meal, for the men are to eat with me at noon.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Immediately the man did just as Joseph had said, and he took them to Joseph\'92s house. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0But the men became afraid when they were taken to Joseph\'92s house, and they began to say: \'93It is because of the money that was returned in our bags the last time that we are being brought here. Now they will attack us and make us slaves and take our donkeys!\'94\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0So they approached the man who was over Joseph\'92s house and spoke to him at the entrance of the house. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0They said: \'93Pardon us, my lord! We did come down the first time to buy food. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0But when we arrived at our lodging place and began opening our bags, why, here was the money of each one in the mouth of his bag, our money in full weight. So we would like to return it personally. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0And we have brought more money to buy food. We do not know who placed our money in our bags.\'94 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93It is all right. Do not be afraid. Your God and the God of your father put treasure in your bags. Your money came first to me.\'94 After that he brought out Simeon to them.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0Then the man brought them into Joseph\'92s house and gave them water for washing their feet, and he gave fodder for their donkeys. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0And they prepared the gift for Joseph\'92s coming at noon, for they had heard that they were going to eat a meal there. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0When Joseph went into the house, they brought their gift to him into the house and prostrated themselves to him to the ground. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0After this he inquired about their welfare and said: \'93How is your aged father of whom you have spoken? Is he still alive?\'94 \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0To this they said: \'93Your servant our father is well. He is still alive.\'94 Then they bowed down and prostrated themselves.\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0When he looked up and saw Benjamin his brother, the son of his mother, he said: \'93Is this your brother, the youngest one of whom you have spoken to me?\'94 He added: \'93May God show you his favor, my son.\'94 \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Joseph then hurried out, because he was overcome with emotion for his brother, and he looked for a place to weep. So he went into a private room and gave way to tears there. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0After that he washed his face and went out, now in control of himself, and he said: \'93Serve the meal.\'94 \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0They served him by himself and them by themselves, and the Egyptians with him ate by themselves, for the Egyptians could not eat a meal with the Hebrews, because that is a detestable thing to the Egyptians.\
\cf4 33\cf5 \'a0The brothers were seated before him, the firstborn according to his right as firstborn and the youngest according to his youth, and they kept looking at one another in amazement. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0He kept sending portions of food from his table to theirs, but he increased Benjamin\'92s portion five times the size of the portions of all the others. So they continued banqueting and drinking with him to the full.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 44\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Later he commanded the man who was over his house: \'93Fill the bags of the men with as much food as they can carry, and place the money of each one in the mouth of his bag. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0But you must place my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the bag of the youngest, along with the money for his grain.\'94 So he did as Joseph had instructed.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0In the morning when it had become light, the men were sent away with their donkeys. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0They had not gone far from the city when Joseph said to the man who was over his house: \'93Get up! Chase after the men! When you overtake them, say to them, \'91Why have you repaid bad for good? \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Is not this what my master drinks from and uses to read omens expertly? It is a wicked thing you have done.\'92\'94\
\cf4 6\cf5 \'a0So he overtook them and spoke these words to them. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0But they said to him: \'93Why does my lord say such a thing? It is unthinkable that your servants would do anything like this. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Why, the money that we found in the mouth of our bags we brought back to you from the land of Canaan. How, then, could we steal silver or gold from the house of your master? \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0If it is found with one of your slaves, let him die, and the rest of us will also become slaves to my master.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0So he said: \'93Let it be as you say: The one with whom it is found will become my slave, but the rest of you will be innocent.\'94 \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0With that each one quickly lowered his bag to the ground and opened it. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0He searched carefully, starting with the oldest and finishing with the youngest. Finally the cup was found in Benjamin\'92s bag.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Then they ripped their garments apart, and each of them lifted his load back onto his donkey and returned to the city. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0When Judah and his brothers went into Joseph\'92s house, he was still there; and they fell to the ground before him. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Joseph said to them: \'93What is this deed that you have done? Did you not know that a man like me can expertly read omens?\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0At this Judah replied: \'93What can we say to my master? What can we speak? And how can we prove ourselves righteous? The true God has found out the error of your slaves. We are now slaves to my master, both we and the one in whose hand the cup was found!\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0However, he said: \'93It is unthinkable for me to do this! The man in whose hand the cup was found is the one who will become a slave to me. As for the rest of you, go up in peace to your father.\'94\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Judah now approached him and said: \'93I beg you, my master, please let your slave speak a word in my master\'92s ears, and do not become angry with your slave, for you are like Pharaoh himself. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0My master asked his slaves, \'91Do you have a father or a brother?\'92 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So we said to my master, \'91We do have an aged father and a child of his old age, the youngest. But his brother is dead, so he is the only remaining son of his mother, and his father loves him.\'92 \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0After that you said to your slaves, \'91Bring him down to me so that I may see him.\'92 \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0But we said to my master, \'91The boy is not able to leave his father. If he did leave him, his father would certainly die.\'92 \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then you said to your slaves, \'91Unless your youngest brother comes down with you, you may not see my face anymore.\'92\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0\'93So we went up to your slave my father and told him the words of my master. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Later our father said, \'91Return and buy a little food for us.\'92 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0But we said, \'91We are not able to go down. If our youngest brother is with us we will go down, for we cannot see the man\'92s face unless our youngest brother is with us.\'92 \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Then your slave my father said to us, \'91You well know that my wife bore but two sons to me. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0But one of them left me and I said: \'93He must surely have been torn to pieces!\'94 and I have not seen him until now. \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0If you were to take this one also out of my sight and a fatal accident were to befall him, you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave with calamity.\'92\
\cf4 30\cf5 \'a0\'93And now if I return to your slave my father without the boy along with us, since his own life is bound up with this one\'92s life, \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0then as soon as he sees that the boy is not there, he will die, and your slaves will indeed bring down the gray hairs of your slave our father to the Grave in grief. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0Your slave gave a guarantee to my father for the boy, saying, \'91If I fail to bring him back to you, then I will have sinned against my father forever.\'92 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0So now, please, let your slave stay instead of the boy as my master\'92s slave, in order that the boy may return with his brothers. \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0How can I return to my father without the boy along with me? I could not bear looking on when this calamity befalls my father!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 45\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0At this Joseph could no longer control himself before all his attendants. So he cried out: \'93Have everyone leave me!\'94 No one else stayed with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers.\
\cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Then he began to weep so loudly that the Egyptians heard it and Pharaoh\'92s house heard it. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Finally Joseph said to his brothers: \'93I am Joseph. Is my father still alive?\'94 But his brothers were unable to answer him at all, because they were astonished on account of him. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0So Joseph said to his brothers: \'93Come close to me, please.\'94 With that they came close to him.\
Then he said: \'93I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0But now do not be upset and do not reproach one another because you sold me here; because God has sent me ahead of you for the preservation of life. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0This is the second year of the famine in the land, and there are yet five years in which there will be no plowing or harvest. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0But God sent me ahead of you in order to preserve for you a remnant on the earth and to keep you alive by a great deliverance. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0So, then, it was not you who sent me here, but it was the true God, in order to appoint me as chief adviser to Pharaoh and lord for all his house and ruler over all the land of Egypt.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0\'93Return quickly to my father, and you must say to him, \'91This is what your son Joseph has said: \'93God has appointed me lord over all Egypt. Come down to me. Do not delay. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0You must dwell in the land of Goshen, where you will be near me\'97you, your sons, your grandsons, your flocks, your herds, and everything you have. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0I will supply you with food there, for there are yet five years of famine. Otherwise, you and your house and everything you have will come to poverty.\'94\'92 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0You and my brother Benjamin can now see with your own eyes that I am really the one speaking to you. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0So you must tell my father about all my glory in Egypt and everything you have seen. Now hurry and bring my father down here.\'94\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Then he embraced his brother Benjamin and gave way to weeping, and Benjamin wept with his arms around his neck. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And he kissed all his brothers and wept over them, and after that his brothers spoke with him.\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0The news reached the house of Pharaoh: \'93Joseph\'92s brothers have come!\'94 It was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and his servants. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0So Pharaoh said to Joseph: \'93Tell your brothers, \'91Do this: Load your beasts of burden and go to the land of Canaan, \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0and take your father and your households and come here to me. I will give you the good things of the land of Egypt, and you will eat the richest part of the land.\'92 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0And you are commanded to tell them: \'91Do this: Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your children and your wives, and you must bring your father on one of them and come here. \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Do not worry about your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.\'92\'94\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0And the sons of Israel did so, and Joseph gave them wagons according to Pharaoh\'92s orders, and he gave them provisions for the journey. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0To each of them he gave individual changes of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave 300 silver pieces and five changes of clothing. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0And to his father he sent the following: ten donkeys carrying good things of Egypt and ten female donkeys carrying grain and bread and sustenance for his father for the journey. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0So he sent his brothers off, and as they departed, he said to them: \'93Do not become upset with one another on the way.\'94\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0Then they went up from Egypt and came into the land of Canaan to their father Jacob. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then they reported to him: \'93Joseph is still alive, and he is the ruler over all the land of Egypt!\'94 But his heart grew numb because he did not believe them. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0When they went on telling him all the words that Joseph had spoken to them and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of their father Jacob began to revive. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Israel exclaimed: \'93It is enough! My son Joseph is still alive! I must go and see him before I die!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 46\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0So Israel took all that he had and departed. When he arrived at Beer-sheba, he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Then God spoke to Israel in a vision by night and said: \'93Jacob, Jacob!\'94 to which he said: \'93Here I am!\'94 \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0He said: \'93I am the true God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for there I will make you into a great nation. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0I myself will go down with you to Egypt, and I myself will also bring you back from there, and Joseph will lay his hand on your eyes.\'94\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0After that Jacob departed from Beer-sheba, and the sons of Israel transported Jacob their father and their children and their wives in the wagons that Pharaoh had sent to transport him. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0They took along their herds and their goods, which they had accumulated in the land of Canaan. And so they came into Egypt, Jacob and all his offspring with him. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0He brought with him into Egypt his sons and his grandsons, his daughters and his granddaughters\'97all his offspring.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Now these are the names of Israel\'92s sons who came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Jacob\'92s firstborn was Reuben.\
\cf4 9\cf5 \'a0The sons of Reuben were Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.\
\cf4 10\cf5 \'a0The sons of Simeon were Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman.\
\cf4 11\cf5 \'a0The sons of Levi were Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0The sons of Judah were Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah. However, Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.\
The sons of Perez came to be Hezron and Hamul.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0The sons of Issachar were Tola, Puvah, Iob, and Shimron.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0The sons of Zebulun were Sered, Elon, and Jahleel.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram, together with his daughter Dinah. All his sons and his daughters numbered 33.\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0The sons of Gad were Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli.\
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0The sons of Asher were Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, and Beriah, and their sister was Serah.\
The sons of Beriah were Heber and Malchiel.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to his daughter Leah. She bore these to Jacob: 16 persons in all.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0The sons of Jacob\'92s wife Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0There were born to Joseph in the land of Egypt Manasseh and Ephraim, whom Asenath the daughter of Potiphera the priest of On bore to him.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0The sons of Benjamin were Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Rachel who were born to Jacob: 14 persons in all.\
\cf4 23\cf5 \'a0The son of Dan was Hushim.\
\cf4 24\cf5 \'a0The sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem.\
\cf4 25\cf5 \'a0These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to his daughter Rachel. She bore these to Jacob: seven persons in all.\
\cf4 26\cf5 \'a0All those who descended from Jacob and went into Egypt with him, aside from the wives of Jacob\'92s sons, were 66. \cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Joseph\'92s sons who were born to him in Egypt were two. All the people of the house of Jacob who came into Egypt were 70.\
\cf4 28\cf5 \'a0Jacob sent Judah ahead to tell Joseph that he was on the way to Goshen. When they came into the land of Goshen, \cf4 29\cf5 \'a0Joseph had his chariot prepared and went up to meet Israel his father at Goshen. When he presented himself to him, he at once embraced him and wept for some time. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0Then Israel said to Joseph: \'93Now I am ready to die; I have seen your face and know that you are still alive.\'94\
\cf4 31\cf5 \'a0Joseph then said to his brothers and to his father\'92s household: \'93Let me go up and report to Pharaoh and tell him, \'91My brothers and my father\'92s household who were in the land of Canaan have come here to me. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0The men are shepherds, and they raise livestock, and they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have.\'92 \cf4 33\cf5 \'a0When Pharaoh calls you and asks, \'91What is your occupation?\'92 \cf4 34\cf5 \'a0you must say, \'91Your servants have raised livestock from our youth until now, both we and our forefathers,\'92 so that you may dwell in the land of Goshen, for every herder of sheep is detestable to the Egyptians.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 47\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0So Joseph went and reported to Pharaoh: \'93My father and my brothers and their flocks and their herds and all that they possess have come from the land of Canaan, and they are in the land of Goshen.\'94 \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0He took five of his brothers and presented them to Pharaoh.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh said to his brothers: \'93What is your occupation?\'94 They replied to Pharaoh: \'93Your servants are herders of sheep, both we and our forefathers.\'94 \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0Then they said to Pharaoh: \'93We have come to reside as foreigners in the land because there are no pastures for the flock of your servants, for the famine is severe in the land of Canaan. So please let your servants dwell in the land of Goshen.\'94 \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0At that Pharaoh said to Joseph: \'93Your father and your brothers have come here to you. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0The land of Egypt is at your disposal. Have your father and your brothers dwell in the very best part of the land. Let them dwell in the land of Goshen, and if you know of any capable men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.\'94\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph brought in Jacob his father and presented him to Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh asked Jacob: \'93How old are you?\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Jacob said to Pharaoh: \'93The years of my wanderings are 130. Few and distressing the years of my life have been, and they are not as long as the years of the lives of my forefathers during their wanderings.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0After that Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from before him.\
\cf4 11\cf5 \'a0So Joseph settled his father and his brothers, and he gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the very best part of the land, in the land of Rameses, just as Pharaoh had commanded. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0And Joseph kept supplying his father and his brothers and the entire household of his father with food according to the number of their children.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Now there was no food in all the land, because the famine was very severe, and the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan became exhausted as a result of the famine. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0Joseph was collecting all the money that was to be found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan for the grain that people were buying, and Joseph kept bringing the money into Pharaoh\'92s house. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0In time the money from the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan was spent, and all the Egyptians began coming to Joseph, saying: \'93Give us food! Why should we die before your very eyes because our money has run out?\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph said: \'93If your money has run out, hand over your livestock, and I will give you food in exchange for your livestock.\'94 \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0So they began bringing their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph kept giving them food in exchange for their horses, the livestock of the flock and of the herd, and the donkeys, and he kept providing them with food in exchange for all their livestock during that year.\
\cf4 18\cf5 \'a0When that year came to its close, they began coming to him the next year and saying: \'93We will not hide from my lord that the money and the stock of domestic animals have already been given to my lord. We have nothing left for my lord but our bodies and our land. \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land in exchange for food, and we together with our land will become slaves to Pharaoh. Give us seed so that we may live and not die and that our land may not become desolate.\'94 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Joseph then bought all the land of the Egyptians for Pharaoh because every Egyptian sold his field, for the famine was very severe; and the land became Pharaoh\'92s.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Then he moved the people into cities, from one end of the territory of Egypt to its other end. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0Only the land of the priests he did not buy, because the rations for the priests were from Pharaoh and they lived on their rations that Pharaoh gave them. That is why they did not sell their land. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph said to the people: \'93See, I have today bought you and your land for Pharaoh. Here is seed for you, and you must sow the land with it. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0When it produces, give a fifth to Pharaoh, but four parts will be yours as seed for the field and as food for you and for those in your houses and for your children to eat.\'94 \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0So they said: \'93You have preserved our lives. Let us find favor in the eyes of my lord, and we will become slaves to Pharaoh.\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0Then Joseph made it a decree, which is valid until today over the land of Egypt, that a fifth belongs to Pharaoh. It was only the land of the priests that did not become Pharaoh\'92s.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0Israel continued to dwell in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen, and they settled in it and were fruitful and increased greatly. \cf4 28\cf5 \'a0And Jacob lived on in the land of Egypt for 17 years, so that the days of Jacob\'92s life came to be 147 years.\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0The time was approaching for Israel to die, so he called his son Joseph and said: \'93If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, place your hand, please, under my thigh, and show loyal love and faithfulness to me. Please, do not bury me in Egypt. \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0When I die, you must carry me out of Egypt and bury me in the grave of my forefathers.\'94 Accordingly, he said: \'93I will do just as you say.\'94 \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0Then he said: \'93Swear to me.\'94 So he swore to him. At that Israel bowed down at the head of his bed.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 48\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0After these things, Joseph was told: \'93Look, your father is getting weak.\'94 At that he took his two sons Manasseh and Ephraim with him. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Then Jacob was told: \'93Here your son Joseph has come to you.\'94 So Israel gathered his strength and sat up on his bed. \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0And Jacob said to Joseph:\
\'93God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0And he said to me, \'91I am making you fruitful, and I will make you many, and I will transform you into a congregation of peoples, and I will give this land to your offspring after you as a lasting possession.\'92 \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0Now your two sons who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt are mine. Ephraim and Manasseh will become mine just as Reuben and Simeon are mine. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0But the children born to you after them will become yours. They will be called by the name of their brothers in their inheritance. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0As for me, when I was coming from Paddan, Rachel died alongside me in the land of Canaan, while there was yet a good stretch of land before coming to Ephrath. So I buried her there on the way to Ephrath, that is, Bethlehem.\'94\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0Then Israel saw Joseph\'92s sons and asked: \'93Who are these?\'94 \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0So Joseph said to his father: \'93They are my sons whom God has given me in this place.\'94 At this he said: \'93Bring them to me, please, so that I may bless them.\'94 \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Now the eyes of Israel were failing from age, and he was unable to see. So Joseph brought them close to him, and he kissed them and embraced them. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Israel said to Joseph: \'93I never imagined I would see your face, but here God has also let me see your offspring.\'94 \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Joseph then removed them from Israel\'92s knees, and he bowed down with his face to the ground.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0Joseph now took the two of them, Ephraim with his right hand to Israel\'92s left and Manasseh with his left hand to Israel\'92s right, and brought them close to him. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0However, Israel put out his right hand and placed it on Ephraim\'92s head, although he was the younger, and he placed his left hand on Manasseh\'92s head. He purposely laid his hands this way, since Manasseh was the firstborn. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0Then he blessed Joseph and said:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93The true God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked,\
The true God who has been shepherding me during all my life until this day,\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf4 16\cf6 \'a0The angel who has been recovering me from all calamity, bless the boys.\
Let my name be called upon them and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac,\
Let them increase to a multitude in the earth.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 17\cf5 \'a0When Joseph saw that his father kept his right hand placed on Ephraim\'92s head, it was displeasing to him, so he tried to take hold of his father\'92s hand to move it from Ephraim\'92s head to Manasseh\'92s head. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Joseph said to his father: \'93Not so, my father, because this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0But his father kept refusing and said: \'93I know it, my son, I know it. He too will become a people, and he too will become great. Nevertheless, his younger brother will become greater than he will, and his offspring will become the full equivalent of nations.\'94 \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0So he continued to bless them on that day, saying:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \'93Let Israel mention you when they pronounce blessings, saying,\
\'91May God make you like Ephraim and like Manasseh.\'92\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf5 Thus he kept putting Ephraim before Manasseh.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0Then Israel said to Joseph: \'93Look, I am dying, but God will certainly continue with you and return you to the land of your forefathers. \cf4 22\cf5 \'a0As for me, I do give you one portion of land more than to your brothers, which I took from the hand of the Amorites with my sword and my bow.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 49\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0And Jacob called his sons and said: \'93Gather yourselves together that I may tell you what will happen to you in the final part of the days. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0Assemble yourselves and listen, you sons of Jacob, yes, listen to Israel your father.\
\cf4 3\cf5 \'a0\'93Reuben, you are my firstborn, my vigor and the beginning of my procreative power, the excellence of dignity and the excellence of strength. \cf4 4\cf5 \'a0With recklessness like turbulent waters, you will not excel, because you have gone up to your father\'92s bed. At that time you defiled my bed. He actually went on to it!\
\cf4 5\cf5 \'a0\'93Simeon and Levi are brothers. Instruments of violence are their slaughter weapons. \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Into their company do not come, O my soul. With their assembly do not join, O my honor, because in their anger they killed men, and for their pleasure they hamstrung bulls. \cf4 7\cf5 \'a0Cursed be their anger, because it is cruel, and their fury, because it is harsh. Let me disperse them in Jacob, and let me scatter them in Israel.\
\cf4 8\cf5 \'a0\'93As for you, Judah, your brothers will praise you. Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies. The sons of your father will bow down before you. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Judah is a lion cub. From the prey, my son, you will certainly go up. He has crouched down and stretched himself out like a lion, and like a lion, who dares rouse him? \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0The scepter will not depart from Judah, neither the commander\'92s staff from between his feet, until Shiloh comes, and to him the obedience of the peoples will belong. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0Tying his donkey to a vine and his donkey\'92s colt to a choice vine, he will wash his clothing in wine and his garment in the blood of grapes. \cf4 12\cf5 \'a0Dark red are his eyes from wine, and his teeth are white from milk.\
\cf4 13\cf5 \'a0\'93Zebulun will reside by the seashore, by the shore where the ships lie anchored, and his remote border will be toward Sidon.\
\cf4 14\cf5 \'a0\'93Issachar is a strong-boned donkey, lying down between the two saddlebags. \cf4 15\cf5 \'a0And he will see that the resting-place is good and that the land is pleasant. He will bend his shoulder to bear the burden and will submit to forced labor.\
\cf4 16\cf5 \'a0\'93Dan will judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel. \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0Let Dan be a serpent by the roadside, a horned snake beside the path, that bites the heels of the horse so that its rider falls backward. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0I will wait for salvation from you, O Jehovah.\
\cf4 19\cf5 \'a0\'93As for Gad, a marauder band will raid him, but he will raid at their heels.\
\cf4 20\cf5 \'a0\'93Asher\'92s bread will be abundant, and he will provide food fit for a king.\
\cf4 21\cf5 \'a0\'93Naphtali is a slender doe. He is speaking words of elegance.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0\'93Joseph is the offshoot of a fruitful tree, a fruitful tree by a spring, whose branches extend over the wall. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0But the archers kept harassing him and shot at him and kept harboring animosity against him. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0And yet his bow remained in place, and his hands stayed strong and agile. This was from the hands of the powerful one of Jacob, from the shepherd, the stone of Israel. \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0He is from the God of your father, and he will help you, and he is with the Almighty, and he will bless you with the blessings of the heavens above, with the blessings of the deep below, with the blessings of the breasts and womb. \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0The blessings of your father will be superior to the blessings of the eternal mountains, to the desirable things of the enduring hills. They will continue upon the head of Joseph, upon the crown of the head of the one singled out from his brothers.\
\cf4 27\cf5 \'a0\'93Benjamin will keep on tearing like a wolf. In the morning he will eat the prey, and in the evening he will divide spoil.\'94\
\cf4 28\cf5 \'a0All of these are the 12 tribes of Israel, and this is what their father said to them when he was blessing them. He gave each of them an appropriate blessing.\
\cf4 29\cf5 \'a0After that he gave these commands to them: \'93I am being gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite, \cf4 30\cf5 \'a0the cave in the field of Machpelah in front of Mamre in the land of Canaan, the field that Abraham purchased from Ephron the Hittite as a property for a burial place. \cf4 31\cf5 \'a0There they buried Abraham and his wife Sarah. There they buried Isaac and his wife Rebekah, and there I buried Leah. \cf4 32\cf5 \'a0The field and the cave that is in it were purchased from the sons of Heth.\'94\
\cf4 33\cf5 \'a0Thus Jacob finished giving these instructions to his sons. Then he drew his feet up onto the bed and breathed his last and was gathered to his people.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chapter 
\f1\b0 \cf3 50\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi576\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf4 1\cf5 \'a0Joseph then threw himself on his father and wept over him and kissed him. \cf4 2\cf5 \'a0After that Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father. So the physicians embalmed Israel, \cf4 3\cf5 \'a0and they took the full 40 days for him, for this is the full period for the embalming, and the Egyptians continued to shed tears for him 70 days.\
\cf4 4\cf5 \'a0When the days of mourning for him passed, Joseph spoke to Pharaoh\'92s court, saying: \'93If I have found favor in your eyes, give this message to Pharaoh: \cf4 5\cf5 \'a0\'91My father made me swear, saying: \'93Look! I am dying. You are to bury me in my burial place, which I have excavated in the land of Canaan.\'94 Please, let me go up and bury my father, after which I will return.\'92\'94 \cf4 6\cf5 \'a0Pharaoh replied: \'93Go and bury your father just as he made you swear.\'94\
\cf4 7\cf5 \'a0So Joseph went up to bury his father, and all of Pharaoh\'92s servants went with him, the elders of his court and all the elders of the land of Egypt \cf4 8\cf5 \'a0and all of Joseph\'92s household and his brothers and the household of his father. Only their little children and their flocks and their herds they left in the land of Goshen. \cf4 9\cf5 \'a0Chariots and horsemen also went up with him, and the camp was very numerous. \cf4 10\cf5 \'a0Then they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is in the region of the Jordan, and there they carried on a very great and bitter mourning, and he kept mourning for his father seven days. \cf4 11\cf5 \'a0The inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw them mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, and they exclaimed: \'93This is a great mourning for the Egyptians!\'94 That is why it was named Abel-mizraim, which is in the region of the Jordan.\
\cf4 12\cf5 \'a0So his sons did for him exactly as he had instructed them. \cf4 13\cf5 \'a0His sons carried him into the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, the field in front of Mamre that Abraham had purchased from Ephron the Hittite as property for a burial place. \cf4 14\cf5 \'a0After he buried his father, Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all those who had gone with him to bury his father.\
\cf4 15\cf5 \'a0When Joseph\'92s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said: \'93It may be that Joseph is harboring animosity against us and that he will repay us for all the evil that we did to him.\'94 \cf4 16\cf5 \'a0So they sent a message to Joseph in these words: \'93Your father gave this command before his death: \cf4 17\cf5 \'a0\'91This is what you are to say to Joseph: \'93I beg you, please pardon the transgression of your brothers and the sin they committed in bringing such harm to you.\'94\'92 Now, please, pardon the transgression of the servants of your father\'92s God.\'94 And Joseph wept when they spoke to him. \cf4 18\cf5 \'a0Then his brothers also came and fell down before him and said: \'93Here we are as slaves to you!\'94 \cf4 19\cf5 \'a0Joseph said to them: \'93Do not be afraid. Am I in the place of God? \cf4 20\cf5 \'a0Although you meant to harm me, God intended it to turn out well and to preserve many people alive, as he is doing today. \cf4 21\cf5 \'a0So now do not be afraid. I will keep supplying you and your little children with food.\'94 Thus he comforted them and spoke reassuringly to them.\
\cf4 22\cf5 \'a0And Joseph continued to dwell in Egypt, he and the household of his father, and Joseph lived for 110 years. \cf4 23\cf5 \'a0Joseph saw the third generation of Ephraim\'92s sons, also the sons of Machir, Manasseh\'92s son. They were born upon Joseph\'92s knees. \cf4 24\cf5 \'a0At length Joseph said to his brothers: \'93I am dying, but God will without fail turn his attention to you, and he will certainly bring you up out of this land to the land about which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.\'94 \cf4 25\cf5 \'a0So Joseph made the sons of Israel swear, saying: \'93God will without fail turn his attention to you. You must take my bones up out of here.\'94 \cf4 26\cf5 \'a0And Joseph died at the age of 110, and they had him embalmed, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt. }